Sociological changes, new technology in industry and commerce, new building
codes, other new laws and regulations, inflationary economies of nations, and ad-
vances in building technology place an ever-increasing burden on building designers
and constructors. They need more and more knowledge and skill to cope with the
demands placed on them.
    The public continually demands more complex buildings than in the past. They
must serve more purposes, last longer, and require less maintenance and repair. As
in the past, they must look attractive. Yet, both building construction and operating
costs must be kept within acceptable limits or new construction will cease.
    To meet this challenge successfully, continual improvements in building design
and construction must be made. Building designers and constructors should be alert
to these advances and learn how to apply them skillfully.
    One advance of note to building design is the adaptation of operations research,
or systems design, developed around the middle of the twentieth century and orig-
inally applied with noteworthy results to design of machines and electronic equip-
ment. In the past, design of a new building was mainly an imitation of the design
of an existing building. Innovations were often developed fortuitously and by in-
tuition and were rare occurrences. In contrast, systems design encourages innova-
tion. It is a precise procedure that guides creativity toward the best decisions. As
a result, it can play a significant role in meeting the challenges posed by increasing
building complexity and costs. The basic principles of systems design are presented
in this section.


1.1   PRINCIPLES OF ARCHITECTURE

A building is an assemblage that is firmly attached to the ground and that provides
total or nearly total shelter for machines, processing equipment, performance of
human activities, storage of human possessions, or any combination of these.

   *Revised and updated from the previous edition by the late Frederick S. Merritt.

                                                  1.1
1.2                                 SECTION ONE


    Building design is the process of providing all information necessary for con-
struction of a building that will meet its owner’s requirements and also satisfy public
health, welfare, and safety requirements. Architecture is the art and science of
building design. Building construction is the process of assembling materials to
form a building.
    Building design may be legally executed only by persons deemed competent to
do so by the state in which the building is to be constructed. Competency is de-
termined on the basis of education, experience, and ability to pass a written test of
design skills.
    Architects are persons legally permitted to practice architecture. Engineers are
experts in specific scientific disciplines and are legally permitted to design parts of
buildings; in some cases, complete buildings. In some states, persons licensed as
building designers are permitted to design certain types of buildings.
   Building construction is generally performed by laborers and craftspeople en-
gaged for the purpose by an individual or organization, called a contractor. The
contractor signs an agreement, or contract, with the building owner under which
the contractor agrees to construct a specific building on a specified site and the
owner agrees to pay for the materials and services provided.
   In the design of a building, architects should be guided by the following prin-
ciples:

1. The building should be constructed to serve purposes specified by the client.
2. The design should be constructable by known techniques and with available
   labor and equipment, within an acceptable time.
3. The building should be capable of withstanding the elements and normal usage
   for a period of time specified by the client.
4. Both inside and outside, the building should be visually pleasing.
5. No part of the building should pose a hazard to the safety or health of its
   occupants under normal usage, and the building should provide for safe evacu-
   ation or refuge in emergencies.
6. The building should provide the degree of shelter from the elements and of
   control of the interior environment—air, temperature, humidity, light, and acous-
   tics—specified by the client and not less than the minimums required for safety
   and health of the occupants.
7. The building should be constructed to minimize adverse impact on the environ-
   ment.
8. Operation of the building should consume a minimum of energy while permit-
   ting the structure to serve its purposes.
9. The sum of costs of construction, operation, maintenance, repair, and anticipated
   future alterations should be kept within the limit specified by the client.

The ultimate objective of design is to provide all the information necessary for the
construction of a building. This objective is achieved by the production of draw-
ings, or plans, showing what is to be constructed, specifications stating what ma-
terials and equipment are to be incorporated in the building, and a construction
contract between the client and a contractor. Designers also should observe con-
struction of the building while it is in process. This should be done not only to
assist the client in ensuring that the building is being constructed in accordance
with plans and specifications but also to obtain information that will be useful in
design of future buildings.
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                  1.3


1.2   SYSTEMS DESIGN AND ANALYSIS

Systems design comprises a logical series of steps that leads to the best decision
for a given set of conditions. The procedure requires:
    Analysis of a building as a system.
    Synthesis, or selection of components, to form a system that meets specific
objectives while subject to constraints, or variables controllable by designers.
    Appraisal of system performance, including comparisons with alternative sys-
tems.
    Feedback to analysis and synthesis of information obtained in system evalua-
tion, to improve the design.
    The prime advantage of the procedure is that, through comparisons of alterna-
tives and data feedback to the design process, systems design converges on an
optimum, or best, system for the given conditions. Another advantage is that the
procedure enables designers to clarify the requirements for the building being de-
signed. Still another advantage is that the procedure provides a common basis of
understanding and promotes cooperation between the specialists in various aspects
of building design.
    For a building to be treated as a system, as required in systems design, it is
necessary to know what a system is and what its basic characteristic are.
    A system is an assemblage formed to satisfy specific objectives and subject to
constraints and restrictions and consisting of two or more components that are
interrelated and compatible, each component being essential to the required per-
formance of the system.
    Because the components are required to be interrelated, operation, or even the
mere existence, of one component affects in some way the performance of other
components. Also, the required performance of the system as a whole, as well as
the constraints on the system, imposes restrictions on each component.
    A building meets the preceding requirements. By definition, it is an assemblage
(Art. 1.1). It is constructed to serve specific purposes. It is subject to constraints
while doing so, inasmuch as designers can control properties of the system by
selection of components (Art. 1.9). Building components, such as walls, floors,
roofs, windows, and doors, are interrelated and compatible with each other. The
existence of any of thee components affects to some extent the performance of the
others. And the required performance of the building as a whole imposes restrictions
on the components. Consequently, a building has the basic characteristics of a
system, and systems-design procedures should be applicable to it.

Systems Analysis. A group of components of a system may also be a system.
Such a group is called a subsystem. It, too, may be designed as a system, but its
goal must be to assist the system of which it is a component to meet its objectives.
Similarly, a group of components of a subsystem may also be a system. That group
is called a subsubsystem.
    For brevity, the major subsystems of a building are referred to as systems in this
book.
    In a complex system, such as a building, subsystems and other components may
be combined in a variety of ways to form different systems. For the purposes of
building design, the major systems are usually defined in accordance with the con-
struction trades that will assemble them, for example, structural framing, plumbing,
electrical systems, and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning.
    In systems analysis, a system is resolved into its basic components. Subsystems
are determined. Then, the system is investigated to determine the nature, interaction,
1.4                                  SECTION ONE


and performance of the system as a whole. The investigation should answer such
questions as:
      What does each component (or subsystem) do?
      What does the component do it to?
      How does the component serve its function?
      What else does the component do?
      Why does the component do the things it does?
      What must the component really do?
      Can it be eliminated because it is not essential or because another component
      can assume its tasks?
      See also Art. 1.8.



1.3      TRADITIONAL DESIGN PROCEDURES

Systems design of buildings requires a different approach to design and construction
than that used in traditional design (Art. 1.9). Because traditional design and con-
struction procedures are still widely used, however, it is desirable to incorporate as
much of those procedures in systems design as is feasible without destroying its
effectiveness. This will make the transition from traditional design to systems de-
sign easier. Also, those trained in systems design of buildings will then be capable
of practicing in traditional ways, if necessary.
    There are several variations of traditional design and construction. These are
described throughout this book. For the purpose of illustrating how they may be
modified for systems design, however, one widely used variation, which will be
called basic traditional design and construction, is described in the following and
in Art. 1.4.
    In the basic traditional design procedure, design usually starts when a client
recognizes the need for and economic feasibility of a building and engages an
architect, a professional with a broad background in building design. The architect,
in turn, engages consulting engineers and other consultants.
    For most buildings, structural, mechanical, and electrical consulting engineers
are required. A structural engineer is a specialist trained in the application of sci-
entific principles to the design of load-bearing walls, floors, roofs, foundations, and
skeleton framing needed for the support of buildings and building components. A
mechanical engineer is a specialist trained in the application of scientific principles
to the design of plumbing, elevators, escalators, horizontal walkways, dumbwaiters,
conveyors, installed machinery, and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning. An
electrical engineer is a specialist trained in the application of scientific principles
to the design of electric circuits, electric controls and safety devices, electric motors
and generators, electric lighting, and other electric equipment.
    For buildings on a large site, the architect may engage a landscape architect as
a consultant. For a concert hall, an acoustics consultant may be engaged; for a
hospital, a hospital specialist; for a school, a school specialist.
    The architect does the overall planning of the building and incorporates the
output of the consultants into the contract documents. The architect determines what
internal and external spaces the client needs, the sizes of these spaces, their relative
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                  1.5


locations, and their interconnections. The results of this planning are shown in floor
plans, which also diagram the internal flow, or circulation, of people and supplies.
Major responsibilities of the architect are enhancement of the appearance inside
and outside of the building and keeping adverse environmental impact of the struc-
ture to a minimum. The exterior of the building is shown in drawings, called ele-
vations. The location and orientation of the building is shown in a site plan. The
architect also prepares the specifications for the building. These describe in detail
the materials and equipment to be installed in the structure. In addition, the archi-
tect, usually with the aid of an attorney engaged by the client, prepares the con-
struction contract.
    The basic traditional design procedure is executed in several stages. In the first
stage, the architect develops a program, or list of the client’s requirements. In the
next stage, the schematic or conceptual phase, the architect translates requirements
into spaces, relates the spaces and makes sketches, called schematics, to illustrate
the concepts. When sufficient information is obtained on the size and general con-
struction of the building, a rough estimate is made of construction cost. If this cost
does not exceed the cost budgeted by the client for construction, the next stage,
design development, proceeds. In this stage, the architect and consultants work out
more details and show the results in preliminary construction drawings and outline
specifications. A preliminary cost estimate utilizing the greater amount of infor-
mation on the building now available is then prepared. If this cost does not exceed
the client’s budget, the final stage, the contract documents phase, starts. It cul-
minates in production of working, or construction, drawings and specifications,
which are incorporated in the contract between the client and a builder and therefore
become legal documents. Before the documents are completed, however, a final
cost estimate is prepared. If the cost exceeds the client’s budget, the design is
revised to achieve the necessary cost reduction.
    In the traditional design procedure, after the estimated cost is brought within the
budget and the client has approved the contract documents, the architect helps the
owner in obtaining bids from contractors or in negotiating a construction price with
a qualified contractor. For private work, construction not performed for a govern-
mental agency, the owner generally awards the construction contract to a contractor,
called a general contractor. Assigned the responsibility for construction of the
building, this contractor may perform some, all, or none of the work. Usually, much
of the work is let out to specialists, called subcontractors. For public work, there
may be a legal requirement that bids be taken and the contract awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder. Sometimes also, separate contracts have to be awarded
for the major specialists, such as mechanical and electrical trades, and to a general
contractor, who is assigned responsibility for coordinating the work of the trades
and performance of the work. (See also Art. 1.4.)
    Building design should provide for both normal and emergency conditions. The
latter includes fire, explosion, power cutoffs, hurricanes, and earthquakes. The de-
sign should include access and facilities for disabled persons.



1.4   TRADITIONAL CONSTRUCTION
      PROCEDURES

As mentioned in Art. 1.3, construction under the traditional construction procedure
is performed by contractors. While they would like to satisfy the owner and the
1.6                                  SECTION ONE


building designers, contractors have the main objective of making a profit. Hence,
their initial task is to prepare a bid price based on an accurate estimate of construc-
tion costs. This requires development of a concept for performance of the work
and a construction time schedule. After a contract has been awarded, contractors
must furnish and pay for all materials, equipment, power, labor, and supervision
required for construction. The owner compensates the contractors for construction
costs and services.
    A general contractor assumes overall responsibility for construction of a build-
ing. The contractor engages subcontractors who take responsibility for the work
of the various trades required for construction. For example, a plumbing contractor
installs the plumbing, an electrical contractor installs the electrical system, a steel
erector structural steel, and an elevator contractor installs elevators. Their contracts
are with the general contractor, and they are paid by the general contractor.
    Sometimes, in addition to a general contractor, the owners contracts separately
with specialty contractors, such as electrical and mechanical contractors, who per-
form a substantial amount of the work required for a building. Such contractors are
called prime contractors. Their work is scheduled and coordinated by the general
contractor, but they are paid directly by the owner.
    Sometimes also, the owner may use the design-build method and award a con-
tract to an organization for both the design and construction of a building. Such
organizations are called design-build contractors. One variation of this type of
contract is employed by developers of groups of one-family homes or low-rise
apartment buildings. The homebuilder designs and constructs the dwellings, but
the design is substantially completed before owners purchase the homes.
    Administration of the construction procedure often is difficult. Consequently,
some owners seek assistance from an expert, called a professional construction
manager, with extensive construction experience, who receives a fee. The construc-
tion manager negotiates with general contractors and helps select one to construct
the building. Managers usually also supervise selection of subcontractors. During
construction, they help control costs, expedite equipment and material deliveries,
and keep the work on schedule (see Art. 17.9). In some cases, instead, the owner
may prefer to engage a construction program manager, to assist in administrating
both design and construction.
    Construction contractors employ labor that may or may not be unionized. Un-
ionized craftspeople are members of unions that are organized by construction
trades, such as carpenter, plumber, and electrician unions. Union members will
perform only the work assigned to their trade. On the job, groups of workers are
supervised by crew supervisors, all of whom report to a superintendent.
    During construction, all work should be inspected. For this purpose, the owner,
often through the architect and consultants, engages inspectors. The field inspectors
may be placed under the control of an owner’s representative, who may be titled
clerk of the works, architect’s superintendent, engineer’s superintendent, or resident
engineer. The inspectors have the responsibility of ensuring that construction meets
the requirements of the contract documents and is performed under safe conditions.
Such inspections may be made at frequent intervals.
    In addition, inspections also are made by representatives of one or more gov-
ernmental agencies. They have the responsibility of ensuring that construction meets
legal requirements and have little or no concern with detailed conformance with
the contract documents. Such legal inspections are made periodically or at the end
of certain stages of construction. One agency that will make frequent inspections
is the local or state building department, whichever has jurisdiction. The purpose
of these inspections is to ensure conformance with the local or state building code.
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                  1.7


    During construction, standards, regulations, and procedures of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration should be observed. These are given in detail in
‘‘Construction Industry. OSHA Safety and Health Standards (29CFR1926 / 1910),’’
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402.
    Following is a description of the basic traditional construction procedure for a
multistory building:
    After the award of a construction contract to a general contractor, the owner
may ask the contractor to start a portion of the work before signing of the contract
by giving the contractor a letter of intent or after signing of the contract by issuing
a written notice to proceed. The contractor then obtains construction permits, as
required, from governmental agencies, such as the local building, water, sewer, and
highway departments.
    The general contractor plans and schedules construction operations in detail and
mobilizes equipment and personnel for the project. Subcontractors are notified of
the contract award and issued letters of intent or awarded subcontracts, then are
given, at appropriate times, notices to proceed.
    Before construction starts, the general contractor orders a survey to be made of
adjacent structures and terrain, both for the record and to become knowledgeable
of local conditions. A survey is then made to lay out construction.
    Field offices for the contractor are erected on or near the site. If desirable for
safety reasons to protect passersby, the contractor erects a fence around the site and
an overhead protective cover, called a bridge. Structures required to be removed
from the site are demolished and the debris is carted away.
    Next, the site is prepared to receive the building. This work may involve grading
the top surface to bring it to the proper elevations, excavating to required depths
for basement and foundations, and shifting of utility piping. For deep excavations,
earth sides are braced and the bottom is drained.
    Major construction starts with the placement of foundations, on which the build-
ing rests. This is followed by the erection of load-bearing walls and structural
framing. Depending on the height of the building, ladders, stairs, or elevators may
be installed to enable construction personnel to travel from floor to floor and even-
tually to the roof. Also, hoists may be installed to lift materials to upper levels. If
needed, temporary flooring may be placed for use of personnel.
    As the building rises, pipes, ducts, and electric conduit and wiring are installed.
Then, permanent floors, exterior walls, and windows are constructed. At the appro-
priate time, permanent elevators are installed. If required, fireproofing is placed for
steel framing. Next, fixed partitions are built and the roof and its covering, or
roofing, are put in place.
    Finishing operations follow. These include installation of the following: ceilings;
tile; wallboard; wall paneling; plumbing fixtures; heating furnaces; air-conditioning
equipment; heating and cooling devices for rooms; escalators; floor coverings; win-
dow glass; movable partitions; doors; finishing hardware; electrical equipment and
apparatus, including lighting fixtures, switches, outlets, transformers, and controls;
and other items called for in the drawings and specifications. Field offices, fences,
bridges, and other temporary construction must be removed from the site. Utilities,
such as gas, electricity, and water, are hooked up to the building. The site is land-
scaped and paved. Finally, the building interior is painted and cleaned.
    The owner’s representatives then give the building a final inspection. If they find
that the structure conforms with the contract documents, the owner accepts the
project and gives the general contractor final payment on issuance by the building
department of a certificate of occupancy, which indicates that the completed build-
ing meets building-code requirements.
1.8                                 SECTION ONE


1.5   ROLE OF THE CLIENT IN DESIGN AND
      CONSTRUCTION

Article 1.4 points out that administration of building construction is difficult, as a
result of which some clients, or owners, engage a construction manager or con-
struction program manager to act as the owner’s authorizing agent and project
overseer. The reasons for the complexity of construction administration can be seen
from an examination of the owner’s role before and during construction.
    After the owner recognizes the need for a new building, the owner establishes
project goals and determines the economic feasibility of the project. If it appears
to be feasible, the owner develops a building program (list of requirements), budget,
and time schedule for construction. Next, preliminary arrangements are made to
finance construction. Then, the owner selects a construction program manager or
an architect for design of the building. Later, a construction manager may be cho-
sen, if desired.
    The architect may seek from the owner approval of the various consultants that
will be needed for design. If a site for the building has not been obtained at this
stage, the architect can assist in site selection. When a suitable site has been found,
the owner purchases it and arranges for surveys and subsurface explorations to
provide information for locating the building, access, foundation design and con-
struction, and landscaping. It is advisable at this stage for the owner to start de-
veloping harmonious relations with the community in which the building will be
erected.
    During design, the owner assists with critical design decisions; approves sche-
matic drawings, rough cost estimates, preliminary drawings, outline specifications,
preliminary cost estimates, contract documents, and final cost estimate; pays de-
signers’ fees in installments as design progresses; and obtains a construction loan.
Then, the owner awards the general contract for construction and orders construc-
tion to start. Also, the owner takes out liability, property, and other desirable in-
surance.
    At the start of construction, the owner arranges for construction permits. As
construction proceeds, the owner’s representatives inspect the work to ensure com-
pliance with the contract documents. Also, the owner pays contractors in accordance
with the terms of the contract. Finally, the owner approves and accepts the com-
pleted project.
    One variation of the preceding procedure is useful when time available for con-
struction is short. It is called phase, or fast-track, construction. In this variation,
the owner engages a construction manager and a general contractor before design
has been completed, to get an early start on construction. Work then proceeds on
some parts of the building while other parts are still being designed. For example,
excavation and foundation construction are carried out while design of the structural
framing is being finished. The structural framing is erected, while heating, venti-
lation, and air-conditioning, electrical, plumbing, wall, and finishing details are
being developed. For tall buildings, the lower portion can be constructed while the
upper part is still being designed. For large, low-rise buildings, one section can be
built while another is under design.


1.6   BUILDING COSTS

Construction cost of a building usually is a dominant design concern. One reason
is that if construction cost exceeds the owner’s budget, the owner may cancel the
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                   1.9


project. Another reason is that costs, such as property taxes and insurance, that
occur after completion of the building often are proportional to the initial cost.
Hence, owners usually try to keep that cost low. Designing a building to minimize
construction cost, however, may not be in the owner’s best interests. There are
many other costs that the owner incurs during the anticipated life of the building
that should be taken into account.
    Before construction of a building starts, the owner generally has to make a
sizable investment in the project. The major portion of this expenditure usually
goes for purchase of the site and building design. Remaining preconstruction costs
include those for feasibility studies, site selection and evaluation, surveys, and pro-
gram definition.
    The major portion of the construction cost is the sum of the payments to the
general contractor and prime contractors. Remaining construction costs usually con-
sist of interest on the construction loan, permit fees, and costs of materials, equip-
ment, and labor not covered by the construction contracts.
    The initial cost to the owner is the sum of preconstruction, construction, and
occupancy costs. The latter covers costs of moving possessions into the building
and start-up of utility services, such as water, gas, electricity, and telephone.
    After the building is occupied, the owner incurs costs for operation and main-
tenance of the buildings. Such costs are a consequence of decisions made during
building design.
    Often, preconstruction costs are permitted to be high so that initial costs can be
kept low. For example, operating the building may be expensive because the design
makes artificial lighting necessary when daylight could have been made available
or because extra heating and air conditioning are necessary because of inadequate
insulation of walls and roof. As another example, maintenance may be expensive
because of the difficulty of changing electric lamps or because cleaning the building
is time-consuming and laborious. In addition, frequent repairs may be needed be-
cause of poor choice of materials during design. Hence, operation and maintenance
costs over a specific period of time, say 10 or 20 years, should be taken into account
in optimizing the design of a building.
    Life-cycle cost is the sum of initial, operating, and maintenance costs. Generally,
it is life-cycle cost that should be minimized in building design rather than con-
struction cost. This would enable the owner to receive the greatest return on the
investment in the building. ASTM has promulgated a standard method for calcu-
lating life-cycle costs of buildings, E917, Practice for Measuring Life-Cycle Costs
of Buildings and Building Systems, as well as a computer program and user’s guide
to improve accuracy and speed of calculation.
    Nevertheless, a client usually establishes a construction budget independent of
life-cycle cost. This often is necessary because the client does not have adequate
capital for an optimum building and places too low a limit on construction cost.
The client hopes to have sufficient capital later to pay for the higher operating and
maintenance costs or for replacement of undesirable building materials and installed
equipment. Sometimes, the client establishes a low construction budget because the
client’s goal is a quick profit on early sale of the building, in which case the client
has little or no concern with future high operating and maintenance costs for the
building. For these reasons, construction cost frequently is a dominant concern in
design.


1.7   MAJOR BUILDING SYSTEMS

The simplest building system consists of only two components. One component is
a floor, a flat, horizontal surface on which human activities can take place. The
1.10                                   SECTION ONE


other component is an enclosure that extends over the floor and generally also
around it to provide shelter from the weather for human activities.
    The ground may serve as the floor in primitive buildings. In better buildings,
however, the floor may be a structural deck laid on the ground or supported above
ground on structural members, such as the joist and walls in Fig. 1.1. Use of a
deck and structural members adds at least two different types of components, or
two subsystems, to the simplest building system. Also, often, the enclosure over
the floor requires supports, such as the rafter and walls in Fig. 1.1, and the walls,
in turn, are seated on foundations in the ground. Additionally, footings are required
at the base of the foundations to spread the load over a large area of the ground,
to prevent the building from sinking (Fig. 1.2a). Consequently, even slight improve-
ments in a primitive building introduce numerous additional components, or sub-
systems, into a building.
    More advanced buildings consist of numerous subsystems, which are referred to
as systems in this book when they are major components. Major subsystems gen-
erally include structural framing and foundations, enclosure systems, plumbing,
lighting, acoustics, safety systems, vertical-circulation elements, electric power and
signal systems, and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC).

Structural System. The portion of a building that extends above the ground level
outside it is called the superstructure. The portion below the outside ground level
is called the substructure. The parts of the substructure that distribute building
loads to the ground are known as foundations.
    Foundations may take the form of walls. When the ground under the building
is excavated for a cellar, or basement, the foundation walls have the additional task
of retaining the earth along the outside of the building (Fig. 1.1). The superstructure
in such cases is erected atop the foundation walls.




   FIGURE 1.1 Vertical section through a one-story building with basement shows location
   of some major components. (Reprinted with permission from F. S. Merritt and J. Ambrose,
   ‘‘Building Engineering and Systems Design,’’ 2d ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.)
                                   BUILDING SYSTEMS                                  1.11



                                                    The footing under a wall (Fig. 1.2a)
                                                 is called a continuous spread footing.
                                                 A slender structural member, such as a
                                                 column (Fig. 1.2b), usually is seated on
                                                 an individual spread footing. When the
                                                 soil is so weak, however, that the spread
                                                 footings for columns become very large,
                                                 it often is economical to combine the
                                                 footings into a single footing under the
                                                 whole building. Such a footing is called
FIGURE 1.2 Commonly used foundations: a raft, or mat, footing or a floating
(a) foundation wall on continuous footing; (b) foundation. For very weak soils, it gen-
individual spread footing for a column; (c) pile erally is necessary to support the foun-
footing for a column.                            dations on piles (Fig. 1.2c). These are
                                                 slender structural members that are
hammered or otherwise driven through the weak soil, often until the tips seat on
rock or a strong layer of soil.
    The foundation system must be designed to transmit the loads from the super-
structure structural system directly to the ground in such a manner that settlement
of the completed building as the soil deflects will be within acceptable limits. The
superstructure structural system, in turn, should be designed to transmit its loads
to the foundation system in the manner anticipated in the design of the foundations.
(See also Sec. 6.)
    In most buildings, the superstructure structural system consists of floor and roof
decks, horizontal members that support them, and vertical members that support
the other components.
    The horizontal members are generally known as beams, but they also are called
by different names in specific applications. For example:
   Joists are closely spaced to carry light loads.
   Stringers support stairs.
   Headers support structural members around openings in floors, roofs, and walls.
   Purlins are placed horizontally to carry level roof decks.
   Rafters are placed on an incline to carry sloping roof decks.
   Girts are light horizontal members that span between columns to support walls.
   Lintels are light horizontal beams that support walls at floor levels in multistory
   buildings or that carry the part of walls above openings for doors and windows.
   Girders may be heavily loaded beams or horizontal members that support other
   beams (Fig. 1.3).
   Spandrels carry exterior walls and support edges of floors and roofs in multi-
   story buildings.
   Trusses serve the same purposes as girders but consists of slender horizontal,
   vertical, and inclined components with large open spaces between them. The
   spaces are triangular in shape. Light beams similarly formed are called open-
   web joists (Fig. 1.6d).
   Floor and roof decks or the beams that support them are usually seated on load-
bearing walls or carried by columns, which carry the load downward. (The hori-
zontal members also may be suspended on hangers, which transmit the load to
1.12                                SECTION ONE




        FIGURE 1.3 Structural-steel skeleton framing for a multistory build-
        ing. (Courtesy of the American Institute of Steel Construction.)



other horizontal members at a higher level.) The system comprising decks, beams,
and bearing walls is known as load-bearing construction (Fig. 1.1). The system
composed of decks, beams, and columns is known as skeleton framing (Fig. 1.3).
    Both types of systems must be designed to transmit to the foundations vertical
(gravity) loads, vertical components of inclined loads, horizontal (lateral) loads, and
horizontal components of inclined loads. Vertical walls and columns have the ap-
propriate alignments for carrying vertical loads downward. But acting alone, these
structural members are inadequate for resisting lateral forces.
    One way to provide lateral stability is to incorporate in the system diagonal
members, called bracing (Fig. 1.3). Bracing, columns, and beams then work to-
gether to carry the lateral loads downward. Another way is to rigidly connect beams
to columns to prevent a change in the angle between the beams and columns, thus
making them work together as a rigid frame to resist lateral movement. Still an-
other way is to provide long walls, known as shear walls, in two perpendicular
directions. Lateral forces on the building can be resolved into forces in each of
these directions. The walls then act like vertical beams cantilevers) in transmitting
the forces to the foundations. (See also Art. 3.2.4.)
   Because of the importance of the structural system, the structural members
should be protected against damage, especially from fire. For fire protection, bracing
                                    BUILDING SYSTEMS                                      1.13


may be encased in fire-resistant floors, roofs, or walls. Similarly, columns may be
encased in walls, and beams may be encased in floors. Or a fire-resistant material,
such as concrete, mineral fiber, or plaster, may be used to box in the structural
members (Fig. 1.6c).
   See also Secs. 7 to 11.

Systems for Enclosing Buildings. Buildings are enclosed for privacy, to exclude
wind, rain, and snow from the interior, and to control interior temperature and
humidity. A single-enclosure type of system is one that extends continuously from
the ground to enclose the floor. Simple examples are cone-like tepees and dome
igloos. A multiple-enclosure type of system consists of a horizontal or inclined top
covering, called a roof (Fig. 1.1), and vertical or inclined side enclosures called
walls.
    Roofs may have any of a wide variety of shapes. A specific shape may be
selected because of appearance, need for attic space under the roof, requirements
for height between roof and floor below, desire for minimum enclosed volume,
structural economy, or requirements for drainage of rainwater and shedding of snow.
While roofs are sometimes given curved surfaces, more often roofs are composed
of one or more plane surfaces. Some commonly used types are shown in Fig. 1.4.
    The flat roof shown in Fig. 1.4a is nearly horizontal but has a slight pitch for
drainage purposes. A more sloped roof is called a shed roof (Fig. 1.4b). A pitched
roof (Fig. 1.4c) is formed by a combination of two inclined planes. Four inclined
planes may be combined to form either a hipped roof (Fig. 1.4d) or a gambrel roof
(Fig. 1.4e). A mansard roof (Fig. 1.4ƒ) is similar to a hipped roof but, composed
of additional planes, encloses a larger volume underneath. Any of the preceding
roofs may have glazed openings, called skylights (Fig. 1.4b), for daylighting the
building interior. The roofs shown in Fig. 1.4c to ƒ are often used to enclose attic
space. Windows may be set in dormers that project from a sloped roof (Fig. 1.4c).
Other alternatives, often used to provide large areas free of walls or columns, in-
clude flat-plate and arched or dome roofs.
    Monitored roofs are sometimes used for daylighting and ventilating the interior.
A monitor is a row of windows installed vertically, or nearly so, above a roof (Fig.




FIGURE 1.4 Roofs composed of plane surfaces: (a) flat roof; (b) shed roof; (c) pitched roof;
(d) hipped roof; (e) gambrel roof; (ƒ) mansard roof; (g) monitored roof; (h) sawtooth
roof. (Reprinted with permission from F. S. Merritt and J. Ambrose, ‘‘Building Engineering and
Systems Design,’’ 2d ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.)
1.14                                  SECTION ONE


1.4g). Figure 1.4h illustrates a variation of a monitored roof that is called a sawtooth
roof.
   The basic element in a roof is a thin, waterproof covering, called roofing (Sec.
12). Because it is thin, it is usually supported on sheathing, a thin layer, or roof
deck, a thick layer, which in turn, is carried on structural members, such as beams
or trusses. The roof or space below should contain thermal insulation (Fig. 1.6c
and d).
   Exterior walls enclose a building below the roof. The basis element in the walls
is a strong, durable, water-resistant facing. For added strength or lateral stability,
this facing may be supplemented on the inner side by a backing or sheathing (Fig.
1.5b). For esthetic purposes, an interior facing usually is placed on the inner side
of the backing. A layer of insulation should be incorporated in walls to resist
passage of heat.
   Generally, walls may be built of unit masonry, panels, framing, or a combination
of these materials.
   Unit masonry consists of small units, such as clay brick, concrete block, glass
block, or clay tile, held together by a cement such as mortar. Figure 1.5a shows a
wall built of concrete blocks.
   Panel walls consist of units much larger than unit masonry. Made of metal,
concrete, glass, plastics, or preassembled bricks, a panel may extend from foun-




 FIGURE 1.5 Types of exterior wall construction: (a) concrete-block wall; (b) wood-framed
 wall; (c) precast-concrete curtain wall.
                                  BUILDING SYSTEMS                                  1.15


dation to roof in single-story buildings, or from floor to floor or from window
header in one story to window sill of floor above in multistory buildings. Large
panels may incorporate one or more windows. Figure 1.5c shows a concrete panel
with a window.
    Framed walls consist of slender, vertical, closely spaced structural members,
tied together with horizontal members at top and bottom, and interior and exterior
facings. Thermal insulation may be placed between the components. Figure 1.5b
shows a wood-framed exterior wall.
    Combination walls are constructed of several different materials. Metal, brick,
concrete, or clay tile may be used as the exterior facing because of strength, du-
rability, and water and fire resistance. These materials, however, are relatively ex-
pensive. Consequently, the exterior facing is made thin and backed up with a less
expensive material. For example, brick may be used as an exterior facing with wood
framing or concrete block as the backup.
    Exterior walls may be classified as curtain walls or bearing walls. Curtain walls
serve primarily as an enclosure. Supported by the structural system, such walls
need to be strong enough to carry only their own weight and wind pressure on the
exterior face. Bearing walls, in contrast, serve not only as an enclosure but also to
transmit to the foundation loads from other building components, such as beams,
floors, roofs, and other walls (Fig. 1.5a and b). (See also Sec. 11.)
    Openings are provided in exterior walls for a variety of purposes, but mainly
for windows and doors. Where openings occur, structural support must be provided
over them to carry the weight of the wall above and any other loads on that portion
of the wall. Usually, a beam called a lintel is placed over openings in masonry
walls (Fig. 1.5a) and a beam called a top header is set over openings in wood-
framed walls.
    A window usually consists of transparent glass or plastics (glazing) held in place
by light framing, called sash. The window is fitted into a frame secured to the
walls (Fig. 1.5a). For sliding windows, the frame carries guides in which the sash
slides. For swinging windows, stops against which the window closes are built into
the frame.
    Hardware is provided to enable the window to function as required. For mov-
able windows, the hardware includes grips for moving them, locks, hinges for
swinging windows, and sash balances and pulleys for vertically sliding windows.
    The main purposes of windows are to illuminate the building interior with day-
light, to ventilate the interior, and to give occupants a view of the outside. For retail
stores, windows may have the major purpose of giving passersby a view of items
displayed inside. (See also Sec. 11.)
    Doors are installed in exterior walls to give access to or from the interior or to
prevent such access. For similar reasons, doors are also provided in interior walls
and partitions. Thus, a door may be part of a system for enclosing a building or a
component of a system for enclosing interior spaces.

Systems for Enclosing Interior Spaces. The interior of a building usually is com-
partmented into spaces or rooms by horizontal dividers (floor-ceiling or roof-ceiling
systems) and vertical dividers (interior walls and partitions). (The term partitions is
generally applied to non-load-bearing walls.)
   Floor-Ceiling Systems. The basic element of a floor is a load-carrying deck.
For protection against wear, esthetic reasons, foot comfort, or noise control, a floor
covering often is placed over the deck, which then may be referred to as a subfloor.
Figure 1.6a shows a concrete subfloor with a flexible-tile floor covering. A hollow-
cold-formed steel deck is incorporated in the subfloor to house electric wiring.
1.16                                      SECTION ONE




                                                 (a)




  FIGURE 1.6 Examples of floor-ceiling and roof-ceiling systems. (a) Concrete structural slab
  carries hollow-steel deck, concrete fill, and flexible tile flooring. (b) Acoustical-tile ceiling
  incorporating a lighting fixture with provisions for air distribution is suspended below a floor.
  (c) Insulated roof and steel beams are sprayed with mineral fiber for fire protection. (d) In-
  sulated roof and open-web joists are protected by a fire-rated suspended ceiling.



   In some cases, a subfloor may be strong and stiff enough to span, unaided, long
distances between supports provided for it. In other cases, the subfloor is closely
supported on beams. The subfloor in Fig. 1.6a, for example, is shown constructed
integrally with concrete beams, which carry the loads from the subfloor to bearing
walls or columns.
   The underside of a floor or roof and of beams supporting it, including decorative
treatment when applied to that side, is called a ceiling. Often, however, a separate
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                1.17




        FIGURE 1.6 (Continued)



ceiling is suspended below a floor or roof for esthetic or other reasons. Figure 1.6b
shows such a ceiling. It is formed with acoustical panels and incorporates a lighting
fixture and air-conditioning inlets and outlets.
    Metal and wood subfloors and beams require fire protection. Figure 1.6c shows
a roof and its steel beams protected on the underside by a sprayed-on mineral fiber.
Figure 1.6d shows a roof and open-web steel joists protected on the underside by
a continuous, suspended, fire-resistant ceiling. As an alternative to encasement in
or shielding by a fire-resistant material, wood may be made fire-resistant by treat-
ment with a fire-retardant chemical.
    Fire Ratings. Tests have been made, usually in conformance with E119, ‘‘Stan-
dard Methods of Tests of Building Construction and Materials,’’ developed by
ASTM, to determine the length of time specific assemblies of materials can with-
stand a standard fire, specified in E119. On the basis of test results, each construc-
tion is assigned a fire rating, which gives the time in hours that the assembly can
withstand the fire. Fire ratings for various types of construction may be obtained
from local, state, or model building codes or the ‘‘Fire Resistance Design Manual,’’
published by the Gypsum Association.
    Interior Walls and Partitions. Interior space dividers do not have to withstand
such severe conditions as do exterior walls. For instance, they are not exposed to
rain, snow, and solar radiation. Bearing walls, however, must be strong enough to
1.18                                    SECTION ONE


transmit to supports below them the loads to which they are subjected. Usually,
such interior walls extend vertically from the roof to the foundations of a building
and carry floors and roof. The basic element of a bearing wall may be a solid core,
as shown in Fig. 1.7d, or closely spaced vertical framing (studs), as shown in Fig.
1.7b.
   Non-load-bearing partitions do not support floors or roof. Hence, partitions may
be made of such thin materials as sheet metal (Fig. 1.7a), brittle materials as glass
(Fig. 1.7a), or weak materials as gypsum (Fig. 1.7c). Light framing may be used
to hold these materials in place. Because they are non-load-bearing, partitions may
be built and installed to be easily shifted or to be foldable, like a horizontally sliding
door. (see also Sec. 11.)
   Wall Finishes. Walls are usually given a facing that meets specific architectural
requirements for the spaces enclosed. Such requirements include durability under
indoor conditions, ease of maintenance, attractive appearance, fire resistance, water
resistance, and acoustic properties appropriate to the occupancy of the space en-
closed. The finish may be the treated surface of the exposed wall material, such as
the smooth, painted face of a sheet-metal panel, or a separate material, such as
plaster, gypsumboard, plywood, or wallpaper. (See also Sec. 11.)
   Doors. Openings are provided in interior walls and partitions to permit passage
of people and equipment from one space to another. Doors are installed in the
openings to provide privacy, temperature, odor and sound control, and control pas-
sage.
   Usually, a door frame is set around the perimeter of the opening to hold the
door in place (Fig. 1.8). Depending on the purpose of the door, size, and other
factors, the door may be hinged to the frame at top, bottom, or either side. Or the
door may be constructed to slide vertically or horizontally or to rotate about a
vertical axis in the center of the opening (revolving door). (See also Sec. 11.)
   Hardware is provided to enable the door to function as required. For example,
hinges are provided for swinging doors, and guides are installed for sliding doors.
Locks or latches are placed in or on doors to prevent them from being opened.
Knobs or pulls are attached to doors for hand control.




  FIGURE 1.7 Types of partitions: (a) non-load-bearing; (b) gypsumboard on metal studs; (c)
  gypsumboard face panels laminated to a gypsum core panel; (d) concrete bearing wall, floors,
  and beams. (Reprinted with permission from F. S. Merritt and J. Ambrose, ‘‘Building Engi-
  neering and Systems Design,’’ 2d ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.)
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                1.19


                                            Builder’s Hardware. This is a general
                                            term applied to fastenings and devices,
                                            such as nails, screws, locks, hinges, and
                                            pulleys. These items generally are clas-
                                            sified as either finishing hardware or
                                            rough hardware (Sec. 11).

                                            Plumbing. The major systems for con-
                                            veyance of liquids and gases in pipes
                                            within a building are classified as
                                            plumbing. Plumbing pipes usually are
                                            connected to others that extend outside
                                            the building to a supply source, such as
FIGURE 1.8 Example of door and frame.       a public water main or utility gas main,
                                            or to a disposal means, such as a sewer.
For health, safety, and other reasons, pipes of different types of plumbing systems
must not be interconnected, and care must be taken to prevent flow from one system
to another.
   The major purposes of plumbing are: (1) to convey water and heating gas, if
desired, from sources outside a building to points inside where the fluid or gas is
needed, and (2) to collect wastewater and storm water in the building, on the roof,
or elsewhere on the site and convey the liquid to sewers outside the building.
   For these purposes, plumbing requires fixtures for collecting discharged water
and wastes; pipes for supply and disposal; valves for controlling flow; drains, and
other accessories. For more details, see Sec. 14.

Heating, Ventilation, and Air-Conditioning (HVAC). Part of the environmental
control systems within buildings, along with lighting and sound control, HVAC is
often necessary for the health and comfort of building occupants. Sometimes, how-
ever, HVAC may be needed for manufacturing processes, product storage, or op-
eration of equipment, such as computers. HVAC usually is used to control temper-
ature, humidity, air movement, and air quality in the interior of buildings.
    Ventilation is required to supply clean air for breathing, to furnish air for op-
eration of combustion equipment, and to remove contaminated air. Ventilation, how-
ever, also can be used for temperature control by bringing outside air into a building
when there is a desirable temperature difference between that air and the interior
air.
    The simplest way to ventilate is to open windows. When this is not practicable,
mechanical ventilation is necessary. This method employs fans to draw outside air
into the building and distribute the air, often through ducts, to interior spaces. The
method, however, can usually be used only in mild weather. To maintain comfort
conditions in the interior, the fresh air may have to be heated in cold weather and
cooled in hot weather.
    Heating and cooling of a building interior may be accomplished in any of a
multitude of ways. Various methods are described in Sec. 13.

Lighting. For health, safety, and comfort of occupants, a building interior should
be provided with an adequate quantity of light, good quality of illumination, and
proper color of light. The required illumination may be supplied by natural or
artificial means.
1.20                                SECTION ONE


   Daylight is the source of natural illumination. It enters a building through a
fenestration, such as windows in the exterior walls or monitors or skylights on the
roof.
   Artificial illumination can be obtained through consumption of electrical energy
in incandescent, fluorescent, electroluminescent, or other electric lamps. The light
source is housed in a luminaire, or lighting fixture. More details are given in Sec.
15.

Acoustics. The science of sound, its production, transmission, and effects are ap-
plied in the building design for sound and vibration control.
    A major objective of acoustics is provision of an environment that enhances
communication in the building interior, whether the sound is created by speech or
music. This is accomplished by installation of enclosures with appropriate acoustic
properties around sound sources and receivers. Another important objective is re-
duction or elimination of noise—unwanted sound—from building interiors. This
may be accomplished by elimination of the noise at the source, by installation of
sound barriers, or by placing sound-absorbing materials on the surfaces of enclo-
sures.
    Still another objective is reduction or elimination of vibrations that can annoy
occupants, produce noise by rattling loose objects, or crack or break parts or con-
tents of a building. The most effective means of preventing undesirable vibrations
is correction of the source. Otherwise, the source should be isolated from the build-
ing structure and potential transmission paths should be interrupted with carefully
designed discontinuities.

Electric Power and Communication Systems. Electric power is generally bought
from nearby utility and often supplemented for emergency purposes by power from
batteries or a generating plant on the site. Purchased power is brought from the
power lines connected to the generating source to an entrance control point and a
meter in the building. From there, conductors distribute the electricity throughout
the building to outlets where the power can be tapped for lighting, heating, and
operating electric devices.
   Two interrelated types of electrical systems are usually provided within a build-
ing. One type is used for communications, including data, telephone, television,
background music, paging, signal and alarm systems. The second type serves the
other electrical needs of the building and its occupants. For more details, see Sec.
15 and 18.
   In addition to conductors and outlets, an electrical system also incorporates de-
vices and apparatus for controlling electric voltage and current. Because electricity
can be hazardous, the system must be designed and installed to prevent injury to
occupants and damage to building components.
   For more details, see Sec. 15.

Vertical-Circulation Elements. In multistory buildings, provision must be made
for movement of people, supplies, and equipment between the various levels. This
may be accomplished with ramps, stairs, escalators, elevators, dumbwaiters, vertical
conveyors, pneumatic tubes, mail chutes, or belt conveyors. Some of the mechanical
equipment, however, may not be used for conveyance of people.
   A ramp, or sloping floor, is often used for movement of people and vehicles in
such buildings as stadiums and garages. In most buildings, however, stairs are in-
stalled because they can be placed on a steeper slope and therefore occupy less
space than ramps. Nevertheless, federal rules require at least one handicap acces-
sible entrance for all new buildings.
                                      BUILDING SYSTEMS                                         1.21


    A stairway consists of a series of steps and landings. Each step consists of a
horizontal platform, or tread, and a vertical separation or enclosure, called a riser
(Fig. 1.9a). Railings are placed along the sides of the stairway and floor openings
for safety reasons. Also, structural members may be provided to support the stairs
and the floor edges. Often, in addition, the stairway must be enclosed for fire
protection.
    Escalators, or powered stairs, are installed in such buildings as department
stores and transportation terminals, or in the lower stories of office buildings and
hotels, where there is heavy pedestrian traffic between floors. Such powered stairs
consist basically of a conveyor belt with steps attached; an electric motor for mov-
ing the belt, and steps, controls, and structural supports.
    Elevators are installed to provide speedier vertical transportation, especially in
tall buildings. Transportation is provided in an enclosed car that moves along
guides, usually within a fire-resistant vertical shaft but sometimes unenclosed along
the exterior of a building. The shaft, or the exterior wall, has openings, protected
by doors, at each floor to provide access to the elevator car. The car may be sus-
pended on and moved by cables (Fig. 1.9b) or set atop a piston moved by hydraulic
pressure (Fig. 1.9c).
    More information on vertical-circulation elements is given in Sec. 16.

Intelligent Buildings. In addition to incorporating the major systems previously
described, intelligent buildings, through the use of computers and communication
equipment, have the ability to control the total building environment. The equip-
ment and operating personnel can be stationed in a so-called control center or the
equipment can be monitored and controlled remotely via a computer, modem and
telephone line. Various sensors and communication devices, feeding information to
and from the control center, are located in key areas throughout the building for
the purposes of analyzing and adjusting the environment, delivering messages dur-
ing emergencies, and dispatching repair personnel and security guards, as needed.
    To conserve energy, lighting may be operated by sensors that detected people
movement. HVAC may be adjusted in accordance with temperature changes. Ele-




FIGURE 1.9 Vertical-circulation elements: (a) stairs; (b) electric traction elevator; (c) hydraulic
elevator.
1.22                                SECTION ONE


vators may be programmed for efficient handling of variations in traffic patterns
and may be equipped with voice synthesizers to announce floor stops and give
advice in emergencies. In addition, intelligent buildings are designed for ease and
flexibility in providing for changes in space use, piping, electrical conductors, and
installed equipment. See also Arts. 3.5.12 and 3.7.2.
    (F. S. Merritt and J. Ambrose, ‘‘Building Engineering and Systems Design,’’ 2nd
Ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.)



1.8    VALUE ENGINEERING

As indicated in Art. 1.3, the client in the initial design phase develops a program,
or list of requirements. The goal of the designers is to select a system that meets
these requirements. Before the designers do this, however, it is advisable for them
to question whether the requirements represent the client’s actual needs. Can the
criteria and standards affecting the design be made less stringent? After the program
has been revised to answer these questions, the designers select a system. Next, it
is advisable for the designers to question whether the system provides the best
value at the lowest cost. Value engineering is a useful procedure for answering this
question and selecting a better alternative if the answer indicates this is desirable.
    Value engineering is the application of the scientific method to the study of
values of systems. The major objective of value engineering in building design and
construction is reduction of initial and life-cycle costs (Art. 1.6). Thus, value en-
gineering has one of the objectives of systems design, in which the overall goal is
production of an optimum building, and should be incorporated in the systems-
design procedure.
    The scientific method, which is incorporated in the definitions of value engi-
neering and systems design, consists of the following steps:
1. Collection of data and observations of natural phenomena
2. Formulation of a hypothesis capable of predicting future observations
3. Testing of the hypothesis to verify the accuracy of its predictions and abandon-
   ment or improvement of the hypothesis if it is inaccurate
   Those who conduct or administer value studies are often called value engineers,
or value analysts. They generally are organized into an interdisciplinary team for
value studies for a specific project. Sometimes, however, an individual, such as an
experienced contractor, performs value engineering services for the client for a fee
or a percentage of savings achieved by the services.

Value Analysis. Value is a measure of benefits anticipated from a system or from
the contribution of a component to system performance. This measure must be
capable of serving as a guide in a choice between alternatives in evaluations of
system performance. Because generally in comparisons of systems only relative
values need be considered, value takes into account both advantages and disadvan-
tages, the former being considered positive and the latter negative. It is therefore
possible in comparisons of systems that the value of a component of a system may
be negative and subtracts of systems from the overall performance of the system.
   System evaluations would be relatively easy if a monetary value could always
be placed on performance. Then, benefits and costs could be compared directly.
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                1.23


Value, however, often must be based on a subjective decision of the client. For
example, how much extra is an owner willing to pay for beauty, prestige, or better
community relations? Will the owner accept gloom, glare, draftiness, or noise for
a savings in cost? Consequently, other values than monetary must be considered in
value analysis. Such considerations require determination of the relative importance
of the client’s requirements and weighting of values accordingly.
    Value analysis is the part of the value-engineering procedure devoted to inves-
tigation of the relation between costs and values of components and systems and
alternatives to these. The objective is to provide a rational guide for selection of
the lowest-cost system that meets the client’s actual needs.

Measurement Scales. For the purposes of value analysis, it is essential that char-
acteristics of a component or system on which a value is to be placed be distin-
guishable. An analyst should be able to assign different numbers, not necessarily
monetary, to values that are different. These numbers may be ordinates of any one
of the following four measurement scales: ratio, interval, ordinal, nominal.
    Ratio Scale. This scale has the property that, if any characteristic of a system
is assigned a value number k, any characteristic that is n times as large must be
assigned a value number nk. Absence of the characteristic is assigned the value
zero. This type of scale is commonly used in engineering, especially in cost com-
parisons. For example, if a value of $10,000 is assigned to system A and of $5000
to system B, then A is said to cost twice as much as B.
    Interval Scale. This scale has the property that equal intervals between assigned
values represent equal differences in the characteristic being measured. The scale
zero is assigned arbitrarily. The Celsius scale of temperature measurements is a
good example of an interval scale. Zero is arbitrarily established as the temperature
at which water freezes; the zero value does not indicate absence of heat. The boiling
point of water is arbitrarily assigned the value of 100. The scale between 0 and
100 is then divided into 100 equal intervals called degrees (⬚C). Despite the arbi-
trariness of the selection of the zero point, the scale is useful in heat measurement.
For example, changing the temperature of an objective from 40⬚C to 60⬚C, an
increase of 20⬚C, requires twice as much heat as changing the temperature from
45⬚C to 55⬚C, an increase of 10⬚C.
    Ordinal Scale. This scale has the property that the magnitude of a value number
assigned to a characteristic indicates whether a system has more, or less, of the
characteristic than another system has or is the same with respect to that charac-
teristic. For example, in a comparison of the privacy afforded by different types of
partitions, each may be assigned a number that ranks it in accordance with the
degree of privacy that it provides. Partitions with better privacy are given larger
numbers. Ordinal scales are commonly used when values must be based on sub-
jective judgments of nonquantifiable differences between systems.
    Nominal Scale. This scale has the property that the value numbers assigned to
a characteristic of systems being compared merely indicate whether the systems
differ in this characteristic. But no value can be assigned to the difference. This
type of scale is often used to indicate the presence or absence of a characteristic
or component. For example, the absence of a means of access to equipment for
maintenance may be represented by zero or a blank space, whereas the presence
of such access may be denoted by 1 or X.

Weighting. In practice, construction cost usually is only one factor, perhaps the
only one with a monetary value, of several factors that must be evaluated in a
comparison of systems. In some cases, some of the other characteristics of the
1.24                                        SECTION ONE


system may be more important to the owner than cost. Under such circumstances,
the comparison may be made by use of an ordinal scale for ranking each charac-
teristic and then weighting the rankings in accordance with the importance of the
characteristic to the owner.
    As an example of the use of this procedure, calculations for comparison of two
partitions are shown in Table 1.1. Alternative 1 is an all-metal partition and alter-
native 2 is made of glass and metal.
    In Table 1.1, characteristics of concern in the comparison are listed in the first
column. The numbers in the second column indicate the relative importance of each
characteristic to the owner: 1 denotes lowest priority and 10 highest priority. These
are the weights. In addition, each of the partitions is ranked on an ordinal scale,
with 10 as the highest value, in accordance with the degree to which it possesses
each characteristic. These rankings are listed as relative values in Table 1.1. For
construction cost, for instance, the metal partition is assigned a relative value of 10
and the glass-metal partition a value of 8, because the metal partition costs a little
less than the other one. In contrast, the glass-metal partition is given a relative value
of 8 for visibility, because the upper portion is transparent, whereas the metal
partition has a value of zero, because it is opaque.
    To complete the comparison, the weight of each characteristic is multiplied by
the relative value of the characteristic for each partition and entered in Table 1.1
as a weighted value. For construction cost, for example, the weighted values are
8 ⫻ 10 ⫽ 80 for the metal partition and 8 ⫻ 8 ⫽ 64 for the glass-metal partition.
The weighted values for each partition are then added, yielding 360 for alternative
1 and 397 for alternative 2. While this indicates that the glass-metal partition is
better, it may not be the best for the money. To determine whether it is, the weighted
value for each partition is divided by its cost, yielding 0.0300 for the metal partition


TABLE 1.1 Comparison of Alternative Partitions*

                                                                          Alternatives
                                                             1                              2
                                                         All metal                   Glass and metal
                                Relative         Relative      Weighted           Relative    Weighted
    Characteristics            importance         value         value              value       value
Construction cost                   8               10               80              8            64
Appearance                          9                7               63              9            81
Sound transmission                  5                5               25              4            20
Privacy                             3               10               30              2             6
Visibility                         10                0                0              8            80
Movability                          2                8               16              8            16
Power outlets                       4                0                0              0             0
Durability                         10                9               90              9            90
Low maintenance                     8                7               56              5            40
Total weighted values                                             360                            397
Cost                                                            $12,000                        $15,000
Ratio of values to cost                                         0.0300                         0.0265
    * Reprinted with permission from F. S. Merritt, ‘‘Building Engineering and Systems Design,’’ Van Nos-
trand Reinhold Company, New York.
                                  BUILDING SYSTEMS                                 1.25


and 0.0265 for the other. Thus, the metal partition appears to offer more value for
the money and would be recommended.

Economic Comparisons. In a choice between alternative systems, only the dif-
ferences between system values are significant and need to be compared.
   Suppose, for example, the economic effect of adding 1 in of thermal insulation
to a building is to be investigated. In a comparison, it is not necessary to compute
the total cost of the building with and without the insulation. Generally, the value
analyst need only subtract the added cost of 1 in of insulation from the decrease
in HVAC cost to obtain the net saving or cost increase resulting from addition of
insulation. A net saving would encourage addition of insulation. Thus, a decision
can be reached without the complex computation of total building cost.
   In evaluating systems, value engineers must take into account not only initial
and life-cycle costs but also the return the client wishes to make on the investment
in the building. Generally, a client would like not only to maximize profit, the
difference between revenue from use of the building and total costs, but also to
ensure that the rate of return, the ratio of profit to investment, is larger than all of
the following:
   Rate of return expected from the type of business
   Interest rate for borrowed money
   Rate for government bonds or notes
   Rate for highly rated corporate bonds
The client is concerned with interest rates because all costs represent money that
must be borrowed or that could otherwise be invested at a current interest rate. The
client also has to be concerned with time, measured from the date at which an
investment is made, because interest cost increases with time. Therefore, in eco-
nomic comparisons of systems, interest rates and time must be taken into account.
(Effects of monetary inflation can be taken into account in much the same way as
interest.)
    An economic comparison usually requires evaluation of initial capital invest-
ments, salvage values after several years, annual disbursements and annual reve-
nues. Because each element in such a comparison may have associated with it an
expected useful life different from that of the other elements, the different types of
costs and revenues must be made commensurable by reduction to a common basis.
This is commonly done by either:
1. Converting all costs and revenues to equivalent uniform annual costs and income
2. Converting all costs and revenues to present worth of all costs and revenues at
   time zero.
    Present worth is the money that, invested at time zero, would yield at later
times required costs and revenues at a specified interest rate. In economic compar-
isons, the conversions should be based on a rate of return on investment that is
attractive to the client. It should not be less than the interest rate the client would
have to pay if the amount of the investment had to be borrowed. For this reason,
the desired rate of return is called interest rate in conversions. Calculations also
should be based on actual or reasonable estimates of time periods. Salvage values,
for instance, should be taken as the expected return on sale or trade-in of an item
1.26                                  SECTION ONE


after a specific number of years that it has been in service. Interest may be consid-
ered compounded annually.
   Future Value. Based on the preceding assumptions, a sum invested at time zero
increases in time to
                                      S ⫽ P(1 ⫹ i)n                             (1.1)
where S ⫽ future amount of money, equivalent to P, at the end of n periods of
           time with interest i
       i ⫽ interest rate
      n ⫽ number of interest periods, years
      P ⫽ sum of money invested at time zero ⫽ present worth of S
   Present Worth. Solution of Eq. (1.1) for P yields the present worth of a sum
of money S at a future date:
                                      P ⫽ S(1 ⫹ i)n                             (1.2)
The present worth of payments R made annually for n years is
                                         1 ⫺ (1 ⫹ i)⫺n
                               P⫽R                                              (1.3)
                                               i
The present worth of the payments R continued indefinitely can be obtained from
Eq. (1.3) by making n infinitely large:
                                              R
                                         P⫽                                     (1.4)
                                              i
   Capital Recovery. A capital investment P at time zero can be recovered in n
years by making annual payments of

                  R⫽P
                                i
                          1 ⫺ (1 ⫹ i)⫺n
                                        ⫽P
                                                 i
                                                  冋
                                           (1 ⫹ i)n ⫺ 1
                                                        ⫹i              册       (1.5)

When an item has salvage value V after n years, capital recovery R can be computed
from Eq. (1.5) by subtraction of the present worth of the salvage value from the
capital investment P.

                    R ⫽ [P ⫺ V(1 ⫹ i)⫺n]      冋      i
                                               (1 ⫹ i)n ⫺ 1
                                                            ⫹i      册           (1.6)


Example. To illustrate the use of these formulas, an economic comparison is made
in the following for two air-conditioning units being considered for an office build-
ing. Costs are estimated as follows:



                                           Unit 1         Unit 2
                      Initial cost        $300,000       $500,000
                      Life, years               10             20
                      Salvage value        $50,000       $100,000
                      Annual costs         $30,000        $20,000
                                   BUILDING SYSTEMS                             1.27


Cost of operation, maintenance, repairs, property taxes, and insurance are included
in the annual costs. The present-worth method is used for the comparison, with
interest rate i ⫽ 8%.
    Conversion of all costs and revenues to present worth must be based on a com-
mon service life, although the two units have different service lives, 10 and 20
years, respectively. For the purpose of the conversion, it may be assumed that
replacement assets will repeat the investment and annual costs predicted for the
initial asset. (Future values, however, should be corrected for monetary inflation.)
In some cases, it is convenient to select for the common service life the least
common multiple of the lives of the units being compared. In other cases, it may
be more convenient to assume that the investment and annual costs continue in-
definitely. The present worth of such annual costs is called capitalized cost.
    For this example, a common service life of 20 years, the least common multiple
of 10 and 20, is selected. Hence, it is assumed that unit 1 will be replaced at the
end of the tenth period at a cost of $300,000 less the salvage value. Similarly, the
replacement unit will be assumed to have the same salvage value after 20 years.
    The calculations in Table 1.2 indicate that the present worth of the net cost of
unit 2 is less than that for unit 1. If total cost during the twenty year period were
the sole consideration, purchase of unit 2 would be recommended.
    ASTM has developed several standard procedures for making economic studies
of buildings and building systems, in addition to ASTM E917 for measuring life-
cycle costs, mentioned previously. For example, ASTM E964 is titled Practice for
Measuring Benefit-to-Cost and Savings-to-Investment Ratios for Buildings and
Building Systems. Other standards available present methods for measuring internal
rate of return, net benefits, and payback. ASTM also has developed computer pro-
grams for these calculations.

Value Analysis Procedure. In building design, value analysis generally starts with
a building system or subsystem proposed by the architect and consultants. The client
or the client’s representative appoints an interdisciplinary team to study the system
or subsystem and either recommend its use or propose a more economical alter-
native. The team coordinator sets goals and priorities for the study and may appoint
task groups to study parts of the building in accordance with the priorities. The
value analysts should follow a systematic, scientific procedure for accomplishing


           TABLE 1.2 Example Comparison of Two Air-Conditioning Units
                                                       Unit 1     Unit 2
           Initial investment                         $300,000   $500,000
           Present worth of replacement cost in 10     115,800
              years P ⫺ V at 8% interest [Eq.
              (1.2)]
           Present worth of annual cost for 20         294,540    196,360
              years at 8% interest [Eq. (1.3)]
           Present worth of all costs                  710,340    696,360
           Revenue:
           Present value of salvage value after 20      10,730     21,450
              years at 8% interest [Eq. (1.2)]
           Net cost:
           Present worth of net cost in 20 years at   $699,610   $674,910
              8% interest
1.28                                 SECTION ONE


all the necessary tasks that comprise a value analysis. The procedure should provide
an expedient format for recording the study as it progresses, assure that consider-
ation has been given to all information, some of which may have been overlooked
in development of the proposed system, and logically resolve the analysis into
components that can be planned, scheduled, budgeted, and appraised.
    The greatest cost reduction can be achieved by analysis of every component of
a building. This, however, is not practical, because of the short time usually avail-
able for the study and because the cost of the study increases with time. Hence, it
is advisable that the study concentrate on those building systems (or subsystems)
whose cost is a relatively large percentage of the total building (or system) cost,
because those components have possibilities for substantial cost reduction.
    During the initial phase of value analysis, the analysts should obtain a complete
understanding of the building and its major systems by rigorously reviewing the
program, proposed design and all other pertinent information. They should also
define the functions, or purposes, of each building component to be studied and
estimate the cost of accomplishing the functions. Thus, the analysts should perform
a systems analysis, as indicated in Art. 1.2, answer the questions listed in Art 1.2
for the items to be studied, and estimate the initial and life-cycle costs of the items.
    In the second phase of value analysis, the analysts should question the cost-
effectiveness of each component to be studied. Also, by use of imagination and
creative techniques, they should generate several alternative means for accomplish-
ing the required functions of the component. Then, in addition to answers to the
questions in Art. 1.2, the analysts should obtain answers to the following questions:
    Do the original design and each alternative meet performance requirements?
    What does each cost installed and over the life cycle?
    Will it be available when needed? Will skilled labor be available?
    Can any components be eliminated?
    What other components will be affected by adoption of an alternative? What
    will the resulting changes in the other components cost? Will there be a net
    saving in cost?

    In investigating the possibility of elimination of a component, the analysts also
should see if any part of it can be eliminated, if two parts or more can be combined
into one, and if the number of different sizes and types of an element can be
reduced. If costs might be increased by use of a nonstandard or unavailable item,
the analysts should consider substitution of a more appropriate alternative. In ad-
dition, consideration should be given to simplification of construction or installation
of components and to ease of maintenance and repair.
    In the following phase of value analysis, the analysts should critically evaluate
the original design and alternatives. The ultimate goal should be recommendation
of the original design and alternative, whichever offers the greatest value and cost-
savings potential. The analysts also should submit estimated costs for the original
design and the alternative.
    In the final phase, the analysts should prepare and submit to the client or the
client’s representative who appointed them a written report on the study and re-
sulting recommendations. Also, they should submit a workbook containing detailed
backup information.
    Value engineering should start during the conceptual phase of design. Then, it
has the greatest impact on cost control and no cost is involved in making design
changes. During later design phases, design changes involve some cost, especially
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                 1.29


when substitution of major subsystems is involved, but the cost is nowhere near as
great as when changes are made during construction. Such changes should be
avoided if possible. Value engineering, however, should be applied to the project
specifications and construction contract. Correction of unnecessary and overcon-
servative specifications and contract provisions offers considerable potential for cost
reduction.
   (E. D. Heller, ‘‘Value Management: Value Engineering and Cost Reduction,’’
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.; L. D. Miles, ‘‘Techniques of Value Analysis and
Engineering,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York; A Mudge, ‘‘Value Engi-
neering,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York; M. C. Macedo, P. V. Dob-
row, and J. J. O’Rourke, ‘‘Value Management for Construction,’’ John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York.)



1.9   EXECUTION OF SYSTEMS DESIGN

The basic traditional design procedure (Art. 1.3), which has been widely used for
many years, and commonly used variations of it have resulted in many excellent
buildings. It needs improvement, however, because clients cannot be certain that
its use gives the best value for the money or that the required performance could
not have been attained at lower cost. The uncertainty arises because historically:

1. Actual construction costs often exceed low bids or negotiated prices, because of
   design changes during construction; unanticipated delays during construction,
   which increase costs; and unforeseen conditions, such as unexpectedly poor sub-
   surface conditions that make excavation and foundation construction more ex-
   pensive.
2. Construction, operation, or maintenance costs are higher than estimated, because
   of design mistakes or omissions.
3. Separation of design and construction into different specialties leads to under-
   estimated or overestimated construction costs and antagonistic relations between
   designers and builders.
4. Construction costs are kept within the client’s budget at the expense of later
   higher operating, maintenance, and repair costs.
5. Coordination of the output of architects and consultants is not sufficiently close
   for production of an optimum building for the client’s actual needs.

   One objective of systems design is to correct these defects. This can be done
while retaining the desirable features of traditional procedures, such as development
of building design in stages, with progressively more accurate cost estimates and
frequent client review. Systems design therefore should at least do the following:

1. Question the cost effectiveness of proposed building components and stimulate
   generation of lower-cost alternatives that achieve the required performance. This
   can be done by incorporating value engineering in systems design.
2. More closely coordinate the work of various design specialists and engage build-
   ing construction and operation experts to assist in design.
3. Take into account both initial and life-cycle costs.
1.30                                SECTION ONE


4. Employ techniques that will reduce the number of design mistakes and omissions
   that are not discovered until after construction starts.

Systems Design Procedure. Article 1.2 defines systems and explains that systems
design comprises a rational, orderly series of steps that leads to the best decision
for a given set of conditions. Article 1.2 also lists the basic components of the
procedure as analysis, synthesis, appraisal, and feedback. Following is a more for-
mal definition:
   Systems design is the application of the scientific method to selection and as-
sembly of components or subsystems to form the optimum system to attain specified
goals and objectives while subject to given constraints and restrictions.
   The scientific method is defined in Art. 1.8. Goals, objectives, and constraints
are discussed later.
   Systems design of buildings, in addition to correcting defects in traditional de-
sign, must provide answers to the following questions:

1. What does the client actually want the building to accomplish (goals, objectives,
   and associated criteria)?
2. What conditions exist, or will exist after construction, that are beyond the de-
   signers’ control?
3. What requirements for the building or conditions affecting system performance
   does design control (constraints and associated standards)?
4. What performance requirements and time and cost criteria can the client and
   designers use to appraise system performance?

    Collection of information necessary for design of the building starts at the in-
ception of design and may continue through the contract documents phase. Data
collection is an essential part of systems design but because it is continuous
throughout design it is not listed as one of the basic steps.
    For illustrative purposes, the systems design procedure is shown resolved into
nine basic steps in Fig. 1.10. Because value analysis is applied in step 5, steps 4
through 8 covering synthesis, analysis, and appraisal may be repeated several times.
Each iteration should bring the design closer to the optimum.
    In preparation for step 1, the designers should secure a building program and
information on existing conditions that will affect building design. In step 1, the
designers use the available information to define goals to be met by the system.
    Goals. These state what the building is to accomplish, how it will affect the
environment and other systems, and how other systems and the environment will
affect the building. Goals should be generalized but brief statements, encompassing
all the design objectives. They should be sufficiently specific, however, to guide
generation of initial and alternative designs and control selection of the best alter-
native.
    A simple example of a goal is: Design a branch post-office building with 100
employees to be constructed on a site owned by the client. The building should
harmonize with neighboring structures. Design must be completed within 90 days
and construction within 1 year. Construction cost is not to exceed $500,000.
    When systems design is applied to a subsystem, goals serve the same purpose
as for a system. They indicate the required function of the subsystem and how it
affects and is affected by other systems.
    Objectives. With the goals known, the designers can advance to step 2 and
define the system objectives. These are similar to goals but supply in detail the
requirements that the system must satisfy to attain the goals.
                                    BUILDING SYSTEMS                                     1.31




FIGURE 1.10 Basic steps in systems design in addition to collection of necessary information.
1.32                                 SECTION ONE


    In listing objectives, the designers may start with broad generalizations that they
later develop at more detailed levels to guide design of the system. Some objectives,
such as minimization of initial costs, life-cycle costs and construction time, should
be listed. Other objectives that apply to the design of almost every building, such
as the health, safety, and welfare objectives of the building, zoning, and Occupa-
tional Safety and Health Administration regulations, are too numerous to list and
may be adopted by reference. Objectives should be sufficiently specific to guide
the planning of building interior spaces and selection of specific characteristics for
the building and its components: appearance, strength, durability, stiffness, opera-
tional efficiency, maintenance, and fire resistance. Also, objectives should specify
the degree of control needed for operation of systems provided to meet the other
objectives.
    At least one criterion must be associated with each objective. The criterion is a
range of values within which the performance of the system must lie for the ob-
jective to be met. The criterion should be capable of serving as a guide in evalu-
ations of alternative systems. For example, for fire resistance of a wall, the criterion
might be 2-hr fire rating.
    In addition to establishing criteria, the designers should weight the objectives in
accordance with the relative importance of the objectives to the client (Art. 1.8).
These weights should also serve as guides in comparisons of alternatives.
    System Constraints. In step 2 of systems design, the designers should also
define constraints on the system. Constraints are restrictions on the values of design
variables that represent properties of the system and are controllable by the de-
signers. Designers are seldom completely free to choose any values desired for
controllable variables because of various restrictions, which may be legal ones such
as building or zoning code requirements, or may be economic, physical, chemical,
temporal, psychological, sociological, or esthetic requirements. Such restrictions
may fix the values of the controllable variables or establish a range in which they
must lie.
    At least one standard must be associated with each constraint. A standard is a
value or range of values governing a property of the system. The standard speci-
fying a fixed value may be a minimum or maximum value.
    For example, a designer may be seeking to determine the thickness of a load-
bearing brick wall. The local building code may state that such a wall may not be
less than 8 in thick. This requirement is a minimum standard. The designer may
then select a wall thickness of 8 in or more. The requirements of other systems,
however, may indicate that the wall thickness may not exceed 16 in. This is a
maximum standard. Furthermore, bricks may be available only in nominal widths
of 4 in. Hence, the constraints limit the values of the controllable variable, in this
case wall thickness, to 8, 12, or 16 in.
    Synthesis. In step 3, the designers must conceive at least one system that sat-
isfies the objectives and constraints. For this, they rely on their past experience,
knowledge, imagination, and creative skills and on advice from consultants, in-
cluding value engineers, construction experts, and experienced operators of the type
of facilities to be designed.
    In addition, the designers should select systems that are cost-effective and can
be erected speedily. To save design time in selection of a system, the designers
should investigate alternative systems in a logical sequence for potential for achiev-
ing optimum results. The following is a possible sequence:

1. Selection of an available industrialized building, a system that is preassembled
   in a factory. Such a system is likely to be low cost, because of the use of mass-
                                   BUILDING SYSTEMS                               1.33


     production techniques and factory wages, which usually are lower than those
     for field personnel. Also, the quality of materials and construction may be better
     than for custom-built structures, because of assembly under controlled conditions
     and close supervision.
2.   Design of an industrialized building (if the client needs several of the same type
     of structure).
3.   Assembling a building with prefabricated components or systems. This type of
     construction is similar to that used for industrialized buildings except that the
     components preassembled are much smaller parts of the building system.
4.   Specification of as many prefabricated and standard components as feasible.
     Standard components are off-the shelf items, readily available from building
     supply companies.
5.   Repetition of the same component as many times as possible. This may permit
     mass production of some nonstandard components. Also, repetition may speed
     construction, because field personnel will work faster as they become familiar
     with the components.
6.   Design of components for erection so that building trades will be employed on
     the site continuously. Work that compels one trade to wait for completion of
     work by another trade delays construction and is costly.

    Models. In step 4, the designers should represent the system by a model that
will enable them to analyze the system and evaluate its performance. The model
should be simple, consistent with the role for which it is selected, for practical
reasons. The cost of formulating and using the model should be negligible com-
pared with the cost of assembling and testing the actual system.
    For every input to a system, there must be a known, corresponding input to the
model such that the responses (output) of the model to that input are determinable
and correspond to the response of the system to its input. The correlation may be
approximate but nevertheless close enough to serve the purposes for which the
model is to be used. For example, for cost estimates during the conceptual phase
of design, use may be made of a cost model that yields only reasonable guesses of
construction costs. The cost model used in the contract documents phase, however,
should be accurate.
    Models may be classified as iconic, symbolic, or analog. The iconic type may
be the actual system or a part of it or merely bear a physical resemblance to the
actual system. This type is often used for physical tests of performance, such as
load or wind-tunnel tests or adjustments of controls. Symbolic models represent
by symbols the input and output of a system and are usually amenable to mathe-
matical analysis of a system. They enable relationships to be generally, yet com-
pactly, expressed, are less costly to develop and use than other types of models,
and are easy to manipulate. Analog models are real systems but with physical
properties different from those of the actual system. Examples include dial watches
for measuring time, thermometers for measuring heat changes, slide rules for mul-
tiplying numbers, flow of electric current for measuring heat flow through a metal
plate, and soap membranes for measuring torsion in an elastic shaft.
    Variables representing input and properties of a system may be considered in-
dependent variables. These are of two types:

1. Variables that the designers can control or constraints: x1, x2, x3, . . .
2. Variables that are uncontrollable: y1, y2, y3, . . .
1.34                               SECTION ONE


Variables representing system output or performance may be considered dependent
variables: z1, z2, z3. . . .
   The dependent variables are functions of the independent variables. These func-
tions also contain parameters, which can be adjusted in value to calibrate the model
to the behavior of the actual system.
   Step 4 of systems design then may be resolved into four steps, as indicated in
Fig. 1.10:
1. Select and calibrate a model to represent the system for optimization and ap-
   praisal.
2. Estimate values for the uncontrollable, independent variables.
3. Determine values for the controllable variables.
4. Determine the output or performance of the system from the relationship of
   dependent and independent variables by use of the model.
   Cost Models. As an example of the use of models in systems design, consider
the following cost models:
                                     C ⫽ Ap                                    (1.7)
where C ⫽ construction cost of building
      A ⫽ floor area, ft2, in the building
      p ⫽ unit construction cost, dollars per square foot
This is a symbolic model applicable only in the early stages of design when systems
and subsystems are specified only in general form. Both A and p are estimated,
usually on the basis of past experience with similar types of buildings.
                                    C ⫽ 兺Ai pi                                 (1.8)
where Ai ⫽ convenient unit of measurement for the ith system
      pi ⫽ cost per unit for the ith system
This symbolic cost model is suitable for estimating building construction cost in
preliminary design stages after types of major systems have been selected. Equation
(1.8) gives the cost as the sum of the cost of the major systems, to which should
be added the estimated costs of other systems and contractor’s overhead and profit.
Ai may be taken as floor or wall area, square feet, pounds of steel, cubic yards of
concrete, or any other applicable parameter for which the unit cost may be reason-
ably accurately estimated.
                                    C ⫽ 兺Aj pj                                 (1.9)
where Aj ⫽ convenient unit of measurement for the jth subsystem
      pj ⫽ cost per unit for the jth subsystem
This symbolic model may be used in the design development phase and later after
components of the major systems have been selected and greater accuracy of the
cost estimate is feasible. Equation (1.9) gives the construction cost as the sum of
the costs of all the subsystems, to which should be added contractor’s overhead
and profit.
   For more information on cost estimating, see Sec. 19.
                                     BUILDING SYSTEMS                             1.35


   Optimization. The objective of systems design is to select the single best sys-
tem for a given set of conditions, a process known as optimization. When more
than one property of the system is to be optimized or when there is a single char-
acteristic to be optimized but it is nonquantifiable, an optimum solution may or
may not exist. If it does exist, it may have to be found by trial and error with a
model or by methods such as those described in Art. 1.8.
   When one characteristic, such as construction cost, of a system is to be opti-
mized, the criterion may be expressed as
                     Optimize zr ⫽ ƒr(x1, x2, x3, . . . y1, y2, y3, . . .)      (1.10)
where zr   ⫽   dependent variable to be maximized or minimized
       x   ⫽   controllable variable, identified by a subscript
       y   ⫽   uncontrollable variable, identified by a subscript
      ƒr   ⫽   objective function
Generally, however, there are restrictions on values of the independent variables.
These restrictions may be expressed as
                          ƒ1(x1, x2, x3, . . . y1, y2, y3, . . .) ⱖ 0

                          ƒ2(x1, x2, x3, . . . y1, y2, y3, . . .) ⱖ 0           (1.11)

                            .........................
                          ƒn(x1, x2, x3, . . . y1, y2, y3, . . .) ⱖ 0
Simultaneous solution of Eqs. (1.10) and (1.11) yields the optimum values of the
variables. The solution may be obtained by use of such techniques as calculus,
linear programming, or dynamic programming depending on the nature of the var-
iables and the characteristics of the equations.
   Direct application of Eqs. (1.10) and (1.11) to a whole building, its systems,
and its larger subsystems usually is impractical, because of the large number of
variables and the complexity of their relationships. Hence optimization generally
has to be attained in a different way, generally by such methods as suboptimization
or simulation.
   Systems with large numbers of variables may sometimes be optimized by a
process called simulation, which involves trial and error with the actual system or
a model. In simulation, the properties of the system or model are adjusted with a
specific input or range of inputs to the system, and outputs or performance are
measured until an optimum result is obtained. When the variables are quantifiable
and models are used, the solution usually can be expedited by use of computers.
The actual system may be used when it is available and accessible and changes in
it will have little or no effect on construction costs. For example, after installation
of air ducts, an air-conditioning system may be operated for a variety of conditions
to determine the optimum damper position for control of airflow for each condition.
   Suboptimization is a trial-and-error process in which designers try to optimize
a system by first optimizing its subsystems. It is suitable when components influ-
ence each other in series. For example, consider a structural system consisting only
of roof, columns, and footings. The roof has a known load (input), exclusive of its
own weight. Design of the roof affects the columns and footings, because its output
equals the load on the columns. Design of the columns loads only the footings.
1.36                                SECTION ONE


Design of the footings, however, has no effect on any of the other structural com-
ponents. Therefore, the structural components are in series and they may be de-
signed by suboptimization to obtain the minimum construction cost or least weight
of the system.
    Suboptimization of the system may be achieved by first optimizing the footings,
for example, designing the lowest-cost footings. Next, the design of both the col-
umns and the footings should be optimized. (Optimization of the columns alone
will not yield an optimum structural system, because of the effect of the column
weight on the footings.) Finally, roof, columns, and footings together should be
optimized. (Optimization of the roof alone will not yield an optimum structural
system, because of the effect of its weight on columns and footings. A low-cost
roof may be very heavy, requiring costly columns and footings, whereas the cost
of a lightweight roof may be so high as to offset any savings from less-expensive
columns and footings. An alternative roof may provide optimum results.)
    Appraisal. In step 5 of systems design, the designers should evaluate the results
obtained in step 4, modeling the system and applying the model. The designers
should verify that construction and life-cycle costs will be acceptable to the client
and that the proposed system satisfies all objectives and constraints.
    During the preceding steps, value analysis may have been applied to parts of
the building. In step 6, however, value analysis should be applied to the whole
building system. This process may result in changes only to parts of the system,
producing a new system, or several alternatives to the original design may be pro-
posed. In steps 7 and 8, therefore, the new systems, or at least those with good
prospects, should be modeled and evaluated. During and after this process, com-
pletely different alternatives may be conceived. As a result, steps 4 through 8 should
be repeated for the new concepts. Finally, in step 9, the best of the systems studied
should be selected.
    (R. J. Aguilar, ‘‘Systems Analysis and Design in Engineering, Architecture Con-
struction and Planning,’’ Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: R. L. Ackoff
and M. W. Saseini, ‘‘Fundamentals of Operations Research,’’ John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York; K. I. Majid, ‘‘Optimum Design of Structures,’’ Halsted Press / Wiley,
New York; E. J. McCormick, ‘‘Human Factors in Engineering,’’ McGraw-Hill Pub-
lishing Company, New York; F. S. Merritt and J. A. Ambrose, ‘‘Building Engi-
neering and Systems Design,’’ 2nd Ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York; R.
DeNeufville and J. H. Stafford, ‘‘Systems Analysis for Engineers and Managers,’’
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York; L. Spunt, ‘‘Optimum Structural De-
sign,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.)



1.10   BUILDING CODES

Many of the restrictions encountered in building design are imposed by legal reg-
ulations. While all must be met, those in building codes are the most significant
because they affect almost every part of a building.
    Building codes are established under the police powers of a state to protect the
health, welfare, and safety of communities. A code is administered by a building
official of the municipality or state that adopts it by legislation. Development of a
local code may be guided by a model code, such as those promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, Inc., Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., and Southern Building Code Congress Interna-
tional, Inc.
                                  BUILDING SYSTEMS                                 1.37


   In general, building-code requirements are the minimum needed for public pro-
tection. Design of a building must satisfy these requirements. Often, however, ar-
chitects and engineers must design more conservatively, to meet the client’s needs,
produce a more efficient building system, or take into account conditions not cov-
ered fully by code provisions.
   Construction drawings for a building should be submitted to the building-code
administrator before construction starts. If the building will meet code requirements,
the administrator issues a building permit, on receipt of which the contractor may
commence building. During construction, the administrator sends inspectors peri-
odically to inspect the work. If they discover a violation, they may issue an order
to remove it or they may halt construction, depending on the seriousness of the
violation. On completion of construction, if the work conforms to code require-
ments, the administrator issues to the owner a certificate of occupancy.

Forms of Codes. Codes often are classified as specifications type or performance
type. A specification-type code names specific materials for specific uses and spec-
ifies minimum or maximum dimensions, for example, ‘‘a brick wall may not be
less than 6 in thick.’’ A performance-type code, in contrast, specifies required per-
formance of a construction but leaves materials, methods, and dimensions for the
designers to choose. Performance-type codes are generally preferred, because they
give designers greater design freedom in meeting clients’ needs, while satisfying
the intent of the code. Most codes, however, are neither strictly specifications nor
performance type but rather a mixture of the two. The reason for this is that in-
sufficient information is currently available for preparation of an entire enforceable
performance code.
    The organization of building codes varies with locality. Generally, however, they
consist of two parts, one dealing with administration and enforcement and the other
specifying requirements for design and construction in detail.
    Part 1 usually covers licenses, permits, fees, certificates of occupancy, safety,
projections beyond street lines, alterations, maintenance, applications, approval of
drawings, stop-work orders, and posting of buildings to indicate permissible live
loads and occupant loads.
    Part 2 gives requirements for structural components, lighting, HVAC, plumbing,
gas piping and fixtures, elevators and escalators, electrical distribution, stairs, cor-
ridors, walls, doors, and windows. This part also defines and sets limits on occu-
pancy and construction-type classifications. In addition, the second part contains
provisions for safety of public and property during construction operations and for
fire protection and means of egress after the building is occupied.
    Many of the preceding requirements are adopted by reference in the code from
nationally recognized standards or codes of practice. These may be promulgated
by agencies of the federal government or by such organizations as the American
National Standards Institute, ASTM, American Institute of Steel Construction,
American Concrete Institute, and American Institute of Timber Construction.

Code Classifications of Buildings. Building codes usually classify a building in
accordance with the fire zone in which it is located, the type of occupancy, and the
type of construction, which is an indication of the fire protection offered.
   The fire zone in which a building is located may be determined from the com-
munity’s fire-district zoning map. The building code specifies the types of construc-
tion and occupancy groups permitted or prohibited in each fire zone.
   The occupancy group to which a building official assigns a building depends
on the use to which the building is put. Typical classifications include one- and
two-story dwellings; apartment buildings, hotels, dormitories; industrial buildings
1.38                                SECTION ONE


with noncombustible, combustible, or hazardous contents; schools; hospitals and
nursing homes; and places of assembly, such as theaters, concert halls, auditoriums,
and stadiums.
    Type of construction of a building is determined, in general, by the fire ratings
assigned to its components. A code usually establishes two major categories: com-
bustible and noncombustible construction. The combustible type may be subdivided
in accordance with the fire protection afforded major structural components and the
rate at which they will burn; for example, heavy timber construction is considered
slow-burning. The noncombustible type may be subdivided in accordance with the
fire-resistive characteristics of components.
    Building codes may set allowable floor areas for fire-protection purposes. The
limitations depend on occupancy group and type of construction. The purpose is
to delay or prevent spread of fire over large portions of the building. For the same
reason, building codes also may restrict building height and number of stories. In
addition, to permit rapid and orderly egress in emergencies, such as fire, codes limit
the occupant load, or number of persons allowed in a building or room. In accord-
ance with permitted occupant loads, codes indicate the number of exits of adequate
capacity and fire protection that must be provided.



1.11   ZONING CODES

Like building codes, zoning codes are established under the police powers of the
state, to protect the health, welfare, and safety of the public. Zoning, however,
primarily regulates land use by controlling types of occupancy of buildings, building
height, and density and activity of population in specific parts of a jurisdiction.
    Zoning codes are usually developed by a planning commission and administered
by the commission or a building department. Land-use controls adopted by the
local planning commission for current application are indicated on a zoning map.
It divides the jurisdiction into districts, shows the type of occupancy, such as com-
mercial, industrial, or residential, permitted in each district, and notes limitations
on building height and bulk and on population density in each district.
    The planning commission usually also prepares a master plan as a guide to the
growth of the jurisdiction. A future land-use plan is an important part of the master
plan. The commission’s objective is to steer changes in the zoning map in the
direction of the future land-use plan. The commission, however, is not required to
adhere rigidly to the plans for the future. As conditions warrant, the commission
may grant variances from any of the regulations.
    In addition, the planning commission may establish land subdivision regulations,
to control development of large parcels of land. While the local zoning map spec-
ifies minimum lot area for a building and minimum frontage a lot may have along
a street, subdivision regulations, in contrast, specify the level of improvements to
be installed in new land-development projects. These regulations contain criteria
for location, grade, width, and type of pavement of streets, length of blocks, open
spaces to be provided, and right of way for utilities.
    A jurisdiction may also be divided into fire zones in accordance with population
density and probable degree of danger from fire. The fire-zone map indicates the
limitations on types of construction that the zoning map would otherwise permit.
    In the vicinity of airports, zoning may be applied to maintain obstruction-free
approach zones for aircraft and to provide noise-attenuating distances around the
                                      BUILDING SYSTEMS                                       1.39


airports. Airport zoning limits building heights in accordance with distance from
the airport.

Control of Building Height. Zoning places limitations on building dimensions to
limit population density and to protect the rights of occupants of existing buildings
to light, air, and esthetic surroundings. Various zoning ordinances achieve these
objectives in a variety of ways, including establishment of a specific maximum
height or number of stories, limitation of height in accordance with street width,
setting minimums for distances of buildings from lot lines, or relating total floor
area in a building to the lot area or to the area of the lot occupied by a building.
Applications of some of these limitations are illustrated in Fig. 1.11.
    Figure 1.11a shows a case where zoning prohibits buildings from exceeding 12
stories or 150 ft in height. Figure 1.11b illustrates a case where zoning relates
building height to street width. In this case, for the specific street width, zoning
permits a building to be erected along the lot boundary to a height of six stories
or 85 ft. Greater heights are permitted, however, so long as the building does not
penetrate sky-exposure planes. For the case shown in Fig. 1.11b, these planes start
at the lot line at the 85-ft height and incline inward at a slope of 3:1. Some zoning
codes will permit the upper part of the building to penetrate the planes if the floor
area of the tower at any level does not exceed 40% of the lot area and the ratio of
floor area to lot area (floor-area ratio) of the whole building does not exceed 15.
To maximize the floor area in the building and maintain verticality of exterior walls,
designers usually set back the upper parts of a building in a series of steps (Fig.
1.11b).
    Some zoning ordinances, however, permit an alternative that many designers
prefer. If the building is set back from the lot lines at the base to provide a street-
level plaza, which is a convenience to the public and reduces building bulk, zoning




 FIGURE 1.11 Examples of limitations placed by zoning codes on building height: (a) height
 limitations for buildings constructed along lot boundaries; (b) setbacks required by a 3:1 sky
 exposure plane; (c) height of a sheet tower occupying only part of a lot is limited by the total
 floor area permitted. (Reprinted with permission from F. S. Merritt and J. Ambrose, ‘‘Building
 Engineering and Systems Design,’’ 2d ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.)
1.40                                 SECTION ONE


permits the building to be erected as a sheer tower (Fig. 1.11c). The code may set
a maximum floor-area ratio of 15 or 18, depending on whether the floor area at
any level of the tower does not exceed 50 or 40%, respectively, of the lot area.



1.12    OTHER REGULATIONS

In addition to building and zoning codes, building design and construction must
comply with many other regulations. These include those of the local or state health,
labor, and fire departments; local utility companies; and local departments of high-
ways, streets, sewers, and water. These agencies may require that drawings for the
building be submitted for review and that a permit be granted before construction
starts.
   Also, building construction and conditions in buildings after completion must
comply with regulations of the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) based on the Occupational Safety and Health Act originally passed by
Congress in 1970. There is, however, no provision in this law for reviewing building
plans before construction starts. OSHA usually inspects buildings only after an
accident occurs or a complaint has been received. Therefore, building owners, de-
signers, and contractors should be familiar with OSHA requirements and enforce
compliance with them.
   Other government agencies also issue regulations affecting buildings. For ex-
ample, materials used in military construction must conform with federal specifi-
cations. Another example: Buildings must provide access and facilities for disabled
persons, in accordance with requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA).
   [‘‘Construction Industry: OSHA Safety and Health Standards (29CFR 1926 /
1910),’’ Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington,
D.C. 20401; ‘‘ADA Compliance Guidebook,’’ Building Owners and Managers As-
sociation International,’’ 1201 New York Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20005.]



1.13    SYSTEMS DESIGN BY TEAM

For efficient and successful execution of systems, design of buildings, a design
organization superior to that used for traditional design (Art. 1.3) is highly desirable.
For systems design, the various specialists required should form a building team,
to contribute their skills in concert.
   One reason why the specialists should work closely together is that in systems
design account must be taken of the effects of each component on the performance
of the building and of the interaction of building components. Another reason is
that for cost effectiveness, unnecessary components should be eliminated and,
where possible, two or more components should be combined. When the compo-
nents are the responsibility of different specialists, these tasks can be accomplished
with facility only when the specialists are in direct and immediate communication.
   In addition to the design consultants required for traditional design, the building
team should be staffed with value engineers, cost estimators, construction experts,
and building operators and users experienced in operation of the type of building
                                 BUILDING SYSTEMS                                1.41


to be constructed. Because of the diversity of skills present on such a team, it is
highly probable that all ramifications of a decision will be considered and chances
for mistakes and omissions will be reduced. See also Sec. 2.
   (W. W. Caudill, ‘‘Architecture by Team,’’ and F. S. Merritt and J. Ambrose,
‘‘Building Engineering and Systems Design,’’ 2nd Ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold,
New York.)



1.14   PROJECT PEER REVIEW

The building team should make it standard practice to have the output of the various
disciplines checked at the end of each design step and especially before incorpo-
ration in the contract documents. Checking of the work of each discipline should
be performed by a competent practitioner of that discipline other than the original
designer and reviewed by principals and other senior professionals. Checkers should
seek to ensure that calculations, drawings, and specifications are free of errors,
omissions, and conflicts between building components.
    For projects that are complicated, unique, or likely to have serious effects if
failure should occur, the client or the building team may find it advisable to request
a peer review of critical elements of the project or of the whole project. In such
cases, the review should be conducted by professionals with expertise equal to or
greater than that of the original designers, that is, by peers; and they should be
independent of the building team, whether part of the same firm or an outside
organization. The review should be paid for by the organization that requests it.
The scope may include investigation of site conditions, applicable codes and gov-
ernmental regulations, environmental impact, design assumptions, calculations,
drawings, specifications, alternative designs, constructibility, and conformance with
the building program. The peers should not be considered competitors or replace-
ments of the original designers, and there should be a high level of respect and
communication between both groups. A report of the results of the review should
be submitted to the authorizing agency and the leader of the building team.
    (‘‘The Peer Review Manual,’’ American Consulting Engineers Council, 1015
15th St., NW, Washington, D.C. 20005, and ‘‘Peer Review, a Program Guide for
Members of the Association of Soil and Foundation Engineers,’’ ASFE, Silver
Spring, MD.)



1.15   APPLICATION OF SYSTEMS DESIGN

Systems design may be used profitably in all phases of building design. Systems
design, however, is most advantageous in the early design stages. One system may
be substituted for another, and components may be eliminated or combined in those
stages with little or no cost.
   Systems design should be preferably applied in the contract documents stage
only to the details being worked out then. Major changes are likely to be costly.
Value analysis, though, should be applied to the specifications and construction
contract, because such studies may achieve significant cost savings.
1.42                               SECTION ONE


   Systems design should be applied in the construction stage only when design is
required because of changes necessary in plans and specifications at that time. Time
available at that stage, however, may not be sufficient for thorough studies. Nev-
ertheless, value analysis should be applied to the extent feasible.
   (F. S. Merritt and J. Ambrose, ‘‘Building Engineering and Systems Design,’’ 2nd
Ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.)
                       SECTION TWO
       THE BUILDING TEAM—
      MANAGING THE BUILDING
             PROCESS
                               Alan D. Hinklin
                                     Director
                           Skidmore, Owings & Merrill
                                Chicago, Illinois




Since the beginning of time, mankind has been involved in the business of building.
Technology and construction methods continually evolve: from the Egyptian post
and lintel system, the Greek pediment, the Roman arch and dome, the Byzantine
basilica, and the new Renaissance perspective to the School of the Bauhaus and
the International Style leading us into modern times and the new millennium. Over
time, societies change, construction methods change, clients change, and the ar-
chitect’s tools change; however, the excitement and energy inherent in the building
process does not change, because of one factor only—the process itself. To begin
this process, two elements are necessary: an idea and a client. Creative minds then
carry the process forward. With the idea comes the development of a building
concept. A sketch or drawing, created through personal interaction with the client,
develops the vocabulary for the physical construction of the concept. A builder and
labor force turn the concept into reality.
   Many processes have been used to manage this interaction. Continual evolution
of the management process has turned it into an independent discipline which,
coupled with the computer, is a major focus of the building industry today. From
the beginning, individuals generating the concepts, preparing drawings, and building
the project were considered part of what we now call the ‘‘service industry.’’ This
section outlines the various complex components and professionals involved in the
building process with respect primarily to the architectural profession. Despite the
changes that have occurred, the basics of the building team and the building process
remain unchanged.




                                        2.1
2.2                                   SECTION TWO


2.1      PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS
         REQUIREMENTS OF ARCHITECTS AND
         ENGINEERS

Management of the building process is best performed by the individuals educated
and trained in the profession, that is, architects and engineers. While the laws of
various states and foreign countries differ, they are consistent relative to the reg-
istration requirements for practicing architecture. No individual may legally indicate
to the public that he or she is entitled to practice as an architect without a profes-
sional certificate of registration as an architect registered in the locale in which the
project is to be constructed. This individual is the registered architect. In addition
to the requirements for individual practice of architecture, most states and countries
require a certificate of registration for a single practitioner and a certificate of au-
thorization for an entity such as a corporation or partnership to conduct business
in that locale.
    An architect is a person who is qualified by education, training, experience, and
examination and who is registered under the laws of the locale to practice archi-
tecture there. The practice of architecture within the meaning and intent of the law
includes:
      Offering or furnishing of professional services such as environmental analysis,
      feasibility studies, programming, planning, and aesthetic and structural design
      Preparation of construction documents, consisting of drawings and specifica-
      tions, and other documents required in the construction process
      Administration of construction contracts and project representation in connec-
      tion with the construction of building projects or addition to, alteration of, or
      restoration of buildings or parts of building
    All documents intended for use in construction are required to be prepared and
administered in accordance with the standards of reasonable skill and diligence of
the profession. Care must be taken to reflect the requirements of country and state
statutes and county and municipal building ordinances. Inasmuch as architects are
licensed for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, documents
prepared by architects must be of such quality and scope and be so administered
as to conform to professional standards.
    Nothing contained in the law is intended to prevent drafters, students, project
representatives, and other employees of those lawfully practicing as registered
architects from acting under the instruction, control, or supervision of their employ-
ers, or to prevent employment of project representatives from acting under the
immediate personal supervision of the registered architect who prepared the
construction documents.


2.2      CLIENT OBJECTIVES FOR BUILDINGS

Building types, time schedules, building attitudes, and legal and economic condi-
tions affect relations with the four major client types for whom an architect may
provide services. These are known as the traditional, developer, turnkey, and design/
build client base.
   Traditional client is usually an individual or organization building a one-time
project with no in-house building expertise. The client, however, possesses the
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                        2.3


innate excitement for the process of witnessing the transformation of plans into the
built environment and seeks an architect to assert control of the process. In most
cases, this includes the architect’s definition of the client’s space needs, program
and physical plant requirements. A more sophisticated traditional client might be a
large corporation, university or other institutional entity that may or may not have
an architect on staff, but still looks to a selected architect to guide the development
process. In this case, the client may have more input into the client’s program
definition based on the in-house capabilities. In both cases, the architect plays the
lead role in the management process and normally provides programming, design,
construction documents, bidding, and characteristic administration in the role of the
traditional architect.
   Developer client offers building process management that reduces some of the
architect’s management role in managing the overall project and provides alternative
methods for approaching design and construction. Development processes such as
scope documentation, fast track, and bid packages are construction methodologies
resulting from the developer client’s need to accelerate the total process due to
fluctuating interest rates and the need to be first in providing space in the market-
place. Through this client base the acceptance of a construction consultant as a
necessary part of the design team evolved. The construction consultant enables
accelerated schedules to be met, provides for the compression of time, and allows
a contractor to be selected by the client to build while the architect is still designing.
   Turnkey client is interchangeable with the design / build client in concept. Both
are based on a complete project being turned over to the owner by a single entity
that is responsible for designing and constructing the project. The owner has little
input in the process until it is turned over. The turnkey developer or contractor
employs the services of an architect, or has an on-staff registered architect, who
designs the project in accordance with the owner’s program requirements. Bids are
usually taken on turnkey developer designs and cost proposals to meet these re-
quirements. Once a turnkey developer is selected, the owner may sell the property
to the developer or authorize its purchase from a third party under option. From
this point forward the owner has little or no participation in the project; the devel-
oper is the turnkey client of an externally employed architect. The architect is then
working on the developer team and is not an independent voice for the real owner.
All decisions are then made by the turnkey developer relative to the architect’s
services.
   Design / build client also has the architect on the developer team and not per-
forming services for the owner. Designers / builders offer to design and construct a
facility for a fixed lump-sum price. They bid competitively to provide this service
or provide free design services prior to commitment to the project and as a basis
for negotiation. Their design work is not primarily aimed at cost-performance trade-
offs, but at reduced cost for acceptable quality.
   The design / build approach to facilities is best employed when the owner re-
quires a relatively straightforward building and does not want to participate in
detailed decision making regarding the various building systems and materials. This
does not mean that the owner has no control over these items. On the contrary, the
owner is often permitted a wide range of selection. But the range of choices is
affected by the fixed-cost restraints imposed by the designer / builder and accepted
by the owner. When the facilities required are within the range of relatively standard
industry-wide prototypes, this restriction may have little significance.
   A common misconception regarding design / build is that poor-quality work in-
evitably results. While there is a general benefit to the builder for reductions in
material and labor costs, the more reputable designer / builder may be relied on to
deliver a building within acceptable industry standards. Facilities where higher-
2.4                                 SECTION TWO


quality systems, more sensitive design needs, or atypical technical requirements
occur deserve the services of an independent design professional.



2.3   PROGRAM DEFINITION

Usually when the term ‘‘program definition’’ is used relative to an architect, it is
understood to mean the client’s program for physical space requirements in a build-
ing. With the decline in the office market in the late 1980s came the loss of, or
minimum use of, the traditional developer and construction management / construc-
tion consultant roles. As an outgrowth of the developer client era, certain developers
and construction consultants turned their emphasis to ‘‘program management.’’ In
this process, a firm is engaged by the client to manage the total development pro-
cess, acting as the client’s agent throughout the total process. The program man-
agement approach expanded the meaning of the word ‘‘program’’ beyond that nor-
mally associated with only the physical space program requirements. The term
‘‘program’’ in this new context defines the process of organizing and executing a
project from inception to completion. This process takes into account legal, finan-
cial, funding, land acquisition, architecture, engineering, specialist consulting, de-
sign administration, insurance, construction administration, and facilities operation
and / or management. The client, instead of managing portions of the process as in
the traditional client and developer client scenarios, looks to one firm for managing
the total process.



2.4   ORGANIZATION OF THE BUILDING TEAM

Architecture is a process involving multidisciplinary input by many professionals.
Comprehensive design services in the professional disciplines of planning, archi-
tecture, landscape architecture, interior design, and civil, structural, mechanical,
electrical, plumbing, and fire protection engineering are offered within one orga-
nization by some large architect-engineer (A / E) and engineer-architect (E / A) firms.
Smaller architectural firms retain these services by contract with consultants. Single-
source design responsibility, coordinated via a common, integrated management
structure, is a requirement in either case for successful development of a project.
    In the performance of professional A / E services on any project, a design team
charged with successful completion of the project in a dedicated professional man-
ner is essential. This team provides continuous service to the project from start to
finish, establishing and maintaining the quality and integrity of each design. A
project leader should be selected to coordinate and manage all the professional
disciplines and consultants involved in the project and to act as liaison with the
client. This leader should work closely with the client to provide policy direction
and set goals and objectives for the professional team. Day-to-day management and
direction of the project’s technical development should be provided by an individ-
ual, usually identified as the architect’s project manager, who performs the key
administrative duties, establishes and maintains design services budgets and sched-
ules, and coordinates the entire A / E effort. A senior designer supervises daily
organization and progress of design development and directs the design efforts of
the project team. As a project’s specific needs or schedule require, additional
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                         2.5


architects, planners, engineers, interior architects, and consultants are involved in
the project to augment the team or to provide specialized consultation.


2.4.1   Architects and Engineering Consultants

The major distinctions between architects and engineers run along generalist and
specialist lines. The generalists are ultimately responsible for the overall planning.
It is for this reason that an architect is generally employed as the prime professional
by a client. On some special projects, such as dams, power plants, wastewater
treatment, and research or industrial installations, where one of the engineering
specialties becomes the predominant feature, a client may select an engineering
professional or an E / A firm to assume responsibility for design and construction
and taken on the lead role. On certain projects, it is the unique and imaginative
contribution of the engineer that may make the most significant total impact on the
architectural design. The overall strength of a dynamic, exposed structure, the so-
phistication of complex lighting systems, or the quiet efficiency of a well-designed
mechanical system may prove to be the major source of the client’s pride in a
facility. In any circumstance, the responsibilities of the professional engineer for
competence and contribution are just as important to the project as those of the
architect.
    Engineers, for example, play a major role in intelligent building system design,
which involves mechanical-electrical systems. However, a building’s intelligence is
also measured by the way it responds to people, both on the inside and outside.
The systems of the building must meet the functional needs of the occupants as
well as respect the human response to temperature, humidity, airflow, noise, light,
and air quality. To achieve the multifaceted goals, an intelligent building requires
an intelligent design process with respect to design and system formulation as well
as efficient and coordinated execution of design and technical documentation within
the management structure.
    An intelligent building begins with intelligent architecture—the shape, the build-
ing enclosure, and the way the building appears and functions. Optimal building
solutions can be achieved through a design process that explores and compares
varying architectural and engineering options in concert. Sophisticated visualization
and analytical tools using three-dimensional computer modeling techniques permit
architects and engineers to rapidly evaluate numerous alternatives. Options can be
carefully studied both visually and from a performance standpoint, identifying en-
ergy and life-cycle cost impact. This enables visualization and technical evaluation
of multiple schemes early in the design phase, setting the basis for an intelligent
building.
    In all cases, the architect’s or engineer’s legal responsibilities to the client remain
firm. The prime professional is fully responsible for the services delivered. The
consultants, in turn, are responsible to the architect or engineer with whom they
contract. Following this principle, the architect or engineer is responsible to clients
for performance of each consultant. Consequently, it is wise for architects and
engineers to evaluate their expertise in supervising others before retaining consult-
ants in other areas of responsibility.


2.4.2   Other Consultants

A building team may require the assistance of specialists. These specialty consult-
ants provide skills and expertise not normally found in an architectural or engi-
2.6                                 SECTION TWO


neering firm. The prime professional should define the consultants required and
assist the client in selecting those consultants. The architect or engineer should
define and manage their services even if the specialty consultant contracts directly
with the client for liability purposes, with the understanding that the client has the
ultimate say in decision making.
    While several consultants may be required, depending on the complexity of the
project, the cost for each may be minimal since their services are provided over
short periods of time during the development process, and all consultants are usually
not servicing the project at the same time. The following consultant services, most
of which are not normally provided by architects and engineers, are provided by
various firms:

•   Acoustical
•   Audiovisual
•   Communications
•   Exterior wall maintenance
•   Fire and life safety
•   Food service
•   Geotechnical engineering and subsurface exploration
•   Graphics
•   Space-usage operations
•   Independent research and testing
•   Landscaping
•   Marketing and leasing
•   Materials handling
•   Parking
•   Preconstruction survey
•   Schedule
•   Security
•   Site surveyor
•   Special foundation systems
•   Special structures
•   Specialty lighting
•   Telecommunications
•   Traffic
•   Vertical transportation
•   Water features
•   Wind tunnel testing



2.5    CLIENT-A/E AGREEMENT

Although verbal contracts can be considered legal, a formal written document is
the preferred way to contract for professional services to be provided by an archi-
                THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                    2.7


tect. Purchase orders are not an acceptable means, since they are not applicable to
a service arrangement but rather only provide a financial accounting system for
purchasing a product, which is normally required internally by a client. A purchase
order should not be used as a client-A / E agreement.
    Most professionals use the AIA Standard Form of Agreement for Architect and
Owner (client). Some larger firms, however, have their own form of agreement
which augments or further defines that of the AIA. The basic elements of the
agreement establish the definition and identification of project phases and define
the specific scope and compensation for the architect’s basic services. Flexibility is
built into this agreement to accommodate supplementary services that may be con-
sidered. In addition, the agreement should define the understandings of the two
parties as well as of any third parties that may be involved in the process and
stipulate how the third parties are to be managed and compensated.
    Furthermore, the client-A / E agreement should define items considered as direct
costs that may be reimbursed under the agreement. Other items also to be addressed
include project terminology, project terms and definitions, and the architect’s status
as it relates to the profession such that the standard of care is clearly understood.
The definition of additional services, changes, and compensation for such services,
as well as the method and timing of payment, reimbursable expenses, taxes, the
responsibility for client-furnished information, project budgets, ownership of doc-
uments, confidentiality provisions, the use of project databases, insurance require-
ments, termination provisions by either party, and dispute resolution may also be
addressed. A / E agreements may also define the documents to be delivered at the
conclusion of each development phase and, in certain cases, the time estimated for
completion of each phase of service.

Compensation for Professional Services. A major concern of an architect is to
arrive at an accurate assessment of the scope of services to be performed. The
nature of the project, the degree of professional involvement, and the skills required
should be considered in arriving at an equitable fee arrangement. Types of fees that
may be used are
•   Percentage of the construction cost of the project
•   Cost plus fee
•   Multiple of direct personnel expense
•   Multiple of technical personnel hourly rates
•   Stipulated or lump sum
•   Billing rates for personnel classification
    For a project requiring what could be described as standard services, the
percentage-of-construction-cost fee is a safe standard. Years of experience with the
relationship between the scope of architectural services required for various sizes
of standard construction contracts provide a basis for such rule-of-thumb fee agree-
ments.
    For projects where atypical services are required, other arrangements are more
suitable. For example, for projects where the scope of service is indefinite, a cost-
plus fee is often best. It permits services to proceed on an as-authorized basis,
without undue gambling for either party to the agreement. Under such an arrange-
ment, the architect is reimbursed for costs and also receives an agreed-on fee for
each unit of effort the architect expended on the project. Special studies, consul-
tations, investigations, and unusual design services are often performed under such
an arrangement.
2.8                                  SECTION TWO


    For projects where the scope can be clearly defined, a lump-sum fee is often
appropriate. In such cases, however, architects should know their own costs and be
able to accurately project the scope of service required to accomplish fixed tasks.
Architects should take care, for the protection of their own, their staff’s, and the
client’s interests, that fees cover the costs adequately. Otherwise, the client’s inter-
ests will suffer, and the architect’s own financial stability may be undermined.
    Fee and payment agreements should be accompanied by a well-defined under-
standing in the form of a written agreement for services between architect and
client. The method of payment should also be defined in the agreement. Certain
clients may desire a billing and payment schedule while monthly billing and pay-
ment is preferred by the architect.


2.6     A/E LIABILITY AND INSURANCE

Architecture and engineering firms normally maintain professional liability insur-
ance. This requires payment of annual premiums based on the coverage provided.
Architects and engineers should maintain coverage in connection with their foreign
operations as well as with their domestic operations. Various types of insurance
usually carried by architects and engineers are listed in Table 2.1.


2.6.1    ‘‘Services’’ vs. ‘‘Work’’

The building industry generally recognizes that the professional architect, engineer,
or design consultant provides service, whereas the contractor, subcontractor, or
material supplier provides work. In providing work, the contractor delivers a prod-
uct and then warrants or guarantees the work. These distinctions are important to
understand with respect to insurance. In the architect’s case, professional liability
insurance provides coverage for the judgment the professional provides while using
reasonable care and therefore does not normally have liquidated damages provi-
sions. Professional liability insurance does not cover the work itself or items un-
dertaken by the contractor in pursuit of the work but does cover negligent errors
and omissions of the architect or engineer. This insurance is a means of managing
the risk associated with the architect’s judgment; it is not product-related. Most


TABLE 2.1 Types of Architect and Engineer Insurance

        Type of insurance                                  Coverage
Commercial general liability           According to occurrence and aggregate
Commercial automobile liability        Bodily injury and property damage
Workers’ compensation                  Statutory limits
Employer’s liability                   Medical care and time lost as a result of injuries
                                         incurred during the performance of the services
Professional liability                 Errors and omissions
Valuable papers                        Loss of drawings, models, computer-produced data,
                                         etc.
Umbrella liability                     Provides coverage in excess of professional
                                         liability coverage
                THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                    2.9


claims against professionals in the building industry are made by clients. Fewer
claims are made by contractors and workers.


2.6.2    Risk Management

So that the architect’s or engineer’s business goals can be accomplished, profes-
sional liability insurance is offered through various underwriters and managed by
professionals. Such professionals should not dictate or limit architectural practice,
but rather should support it; neither should they tell architects to turn away from
risk, but instead they should help manage it.
    Insurance allows the architect or engineer to transfer the risk of financial un-
certainty to an insurance company for a known premium. The professional should
calculate how much risk to assume. The risk the individual retains is the deductible.
The risk the insurance company accrues is the limit of liability over and above the
deductible. By choosing a higher deductible, the professional retains more risk but
pays a lower premium.
    Professional liability protection for the architectural and engineering profession
has been designed with the help of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) and
the National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE) / Professional Engineers in
Private Practice (PEPP). In addition to errors and omissions coverage, the protection
incorporates liability coverage for on-time performance, cost estimating, interior
design, asbestos, and pollution.
    Liability programs vary widely from company to company. In general, the in-
surance industry recommends that architects and engineers:

•   Select a program with flexible limits of liability and deductible options
•   Carefully review the insurance coverage
•   Compare competitive costs
•   Consider the insurance company’s experience
•   Examine the insurance company’s criteria for accepting risk
•   Compare loss prevention services
•   Assure that the company shares its loss information
The AIA and NSPE / PEPP can also provide architects and engineers with valuable
information on what to look for in a professional liability insurance program.


2.6.3    Project Insurance

Project insurance permits the architect to be responsive to the client who has par-
ticular insurance demands. Suppose, for example, that the client wants 3 times the
coverage the architect carries. Project insurance can respond to this requirement.
Project insurance costs are often reimbursable costs and considered a common
element of the construction cost, similar to the cost of the contractor’s insurance
coverage and performance bonds. Project insurance can sometimes reduce the ar-
chitect’s policy costs because project billings are not included in the architect’s
billings when the architect’s practice policy premium is calculated. Project insur-
ance may provide long-term coverage guarantees to the day of substantial or final
completion and up to 5 years thereafter with no annual renewals. Project insurance
2.10                                SECTION TWO


permits clients to take control in the design of an insurance package to protect their
investment and provides clients with stability, security, and risk management.



2.7    DEFINITION OF PROJECT PHASES

The definition of the various phases of development for a particular project from
initial studies through postconstruction should be understood by the client and out-
lined thoroughly in the client-A / E agreement. The most-often-used phases of de-
velopment include the following:

Feasibility Studies. To assist the client in determining the scope of the project
and the extent of services to be performed by various parties, the architect may
enter into an interim agreement for services relating to feasibility studies, environ-
mental impact studies or reports, master planning, site selection, site analysis, code
and zoning review, programming, and other predesign services.

Environmental Impact Studies. Determination of environmental studies and re-
ports required for a project and preparation of such reports, special drawings, or
other documents that may be required for governmental approvals are normally
performed under separate agreements. Attention should be given to zoning, soils,
and the potential of hazardous materials in any form. If any impermissible hazard-
ous materials are encountered, clients should be advised so that they can obtain the
services of a specialty consultant to determine what course of action to take.

Programming. If the architect is required to prepare the program of space re-
quirements for a project, the program should be developed in consultation with the
client to help the client recognize particular needs. Space requirements, interrela-
tionships of spaces and project components, organization subdivision of usage, spe-
cial provision and systems, flexibility, constraints, future expansion, phasing, site
requirements, budgetary and scheduling limitations, and other pertinent data should
all be addressed.

Conceptual Design. During this phase of development, the architect evaluates the
client’s program requirements and develops alternatives for design of the project
and overall site development. A master plan may also be developed during this
phase. The plan serves as the guide and philosophy for the remainder of the de-
velopment of the project or for phasing, should the project be constructed in various
phases or of different components.

Schematic Design. During this phase the project team, including all specialty
consultants, prepares schematic design documents based on the conceptual design
alternative selected by the client. Included are schematic drawings, a written de-
scription of the project, and other documents that can establish the general extent
and scope of the project and the interrelationships of the various project compo-
nents, sufficient for a preliminary estimate of probable construction costs to be
prepared. Renderings and finished scale models may also be prepared at this time
for promotional and marketing purposes.
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                        2.11


Design Development. After client approval of the schematic design, the architect
and the specialty consultants prepare design development documents to define fur-
ther the size and character of the project. Included are applicable architectural, civil,
structural, mechanical, and electrical systems, materials, specialty systems, interior
development, and other such project components that can be used as a basis for
working drawing development.

Construction Documents. After approval of the design development documents,
the architectural-engineering team, together with the applicable specialty consult-
ants, prepares construction documents, consisting of working drawings and tech-
nical specifications for the project components. These include architectural, struc-
tural, mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, and civil work, together with general and
supplementary conditions of the construction contract for use in preparing a final
detailed estimate of construction costs and for bidding purposes.

Construction Phase Services. Diligent construction phase services are essential
to translate design into a finished project. The A / E team continues with the de-
velopment process by issuing clarifications of the bid documents and assisting in
contractor selection (Art. 2.20). Also, during the construction period, the team re-
views shop drawings, contractor payment requests, change-order requests, and visits
the construction site to observe the overall progress and quality of the work. Ar-
chitect and engineer personnel involved in the design of the project should be
available during construction to provide continuity in the design thought process
until project completion and occupancy.

Postconstruction Services. Follow-up with the client after construction comple-
tion is essential to good client relations. Periodic visits to the project by the architect
through the contractor’s warranty period is considered good business.



2.8   SCHEDULING AND PERSONNEL
      ASSIGNMENTS

The effective coordination of any project relies on management’s ability to organize
the project into a series of discreet efforts, with deadlines and milestones identified
in advance. The interdependence of these milestones should be clearly understood
by the client and the project team so that the project can be structured yet still be
flexible to respond to changes and unforeseen delays without suffering in overall
coordination and completion.
    Experience is the basis on which architects and engineers establish major project
milestones that form the framework for project development. The critical path
method (CPM) of scheduling can be used to confirm intermediate milestones cor-
responding to necessary review and approvals, program and budget reconciliation,
and interdisciplinary coordination. CPM consultants can also assist contractors in
establishing overall shop drawings and fabrication and installation schedules for
efficient phasing and coordination of construction. Schedules can be maintained in
a project management computer database. They should be updated on a regular
basis for the duration of the project, since critical path items change from time to
time depending on actual progress of construction. See also Art. 2.9.
2.12                                SECTION TWO


2.9    ACCELERATED DESIGN AND
       CONSTRUCTION

The traditional process of design and construction and the roles and responsibilities
of the various parties need not be changed when fast track, an accelerated design
and construction process, is required. However, this process can affect scheduling
and personnel assignments.
    In the traditional process, the entire facility moves phase by phase through the
entire development process, that is, programming, design, design development, con-
struction documents, bid and award of contracts, construction and acceptance of
completed project (Art. 2.7). With any form of accelerated design and construction,
the final phases remain substantially the same, but the various building systems or
subsystems move through the development process at different times and result in
the release of multiple construction contracts at various times throughout the pro-
cess.
    For any project, basic building siting is determined early in the design process.
Therefore, at an early stage in design, a construction contract can be awarded for
demolition and excavation work. Similarly, basic structural decisions can be made
before all details of the building are established. This permits early award of foun-
dation, below grade utility work, and structural work contracts. Under such circum-
stances, construction can be initiated early in the design process, rather than at the
conclusion of a lengthy design and contract preparation period. Months and even
years can be taken out of the traditional project schedule, depending on the scale
and complexity of the project. Purchase of preengineered, commercially available
building systems can be integrated into the accelerated design and construction
process when standard system techniques are employed, reducing time even more.
    The major requirements for a project in which design and construction occur
simultaneously are

• Accurate cost management to maintain project budgets.
• Full understanding of the construction process by the client, contractor, and de-
  sign professionals so that design decisions and contract documents for each build-
  ing system or subsystem can be completed in a professional manner that addresses
  the requirements of the ongoing construction process.
• Organized and efficient management of the construction process with feedback
  into the design process to maintain a clear definition of the required contract
  packages and schedule.
• Overall project cost control and project construction responsibilities, including
  interface management of independent prime contracts, should also be established.

    Often the major purpose of accelerated design and construction is to reduce the
effect of rapidly increasing construction costs and inflation over the extended project
design and construction period. For projects extending over several years, for ex-
ample, contractors and subcontractors have to quote costs for providing material
and labor that may be installed several years later. In most cases, the costs asso-
ciated with such work are uncertain. Bid prices for such work, especially when it
is of large magnitude, therefore, must be conservative. Accelerated design and con-
struction, however, brings all the financial benefits of a shortened project duration
and early occupancy and reduces the impact of cost escalation. Also, bid prices can
be closer to the actual costs, thus reducing bidding risk to the contractor. The
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                      2.13


combination of phased bidding, shortened contract duration, reduced escalation,
smaller bid packages, and a greater number of bidders can produce substantial
savings in overall construction costs.
    A major objection to accelerated design and construction is that project con-
struction is initiated before bids are obtained for the total project and assurance is
secured that the total project budget can be maintained. In this regard, the reliability
of early cost estimating becomes even more critical. It is the experience of most
clients and architects involved with multiple contracts, however, that such contracts,
bid one at a time, can be readily compared with a total budget line item or trade
breakdown and thus provide safeguards against budget overruns. The ability to
design, bid, and negotiate each contract as a separate entity provides optimum cost
control.
    For accelerated design and construction programs to work effectively, services
of a professional construction manager are normally required. This cost, however,
can be offset by the overall saving in the total project cost due to the reduction in
construction time.
    Normally, the client is responsible for entering into the various construction
contracts when multiple contracts are used. The construction manager acts as the
client’s agent in administration of the contracts. If the architect is to administer the
contracts, additional compensation will be required beyond that associated with one
general contractor who holds all subcontracts, as is the case in the traditional client-
contractor relationship.



2.10    DESIGN MANAGEMENT

Architects manage all aspects of project design simultaneously, their own internal
resources, relations with the specialty consultants, the processes that deliver service
to the client, and through that service, the programs of client needs through the
development process to the creation of a built environment. The requirement that
architects be capable businesspersons is, therefore, far-reaching. The need for good
business sense and a thorough knowledge of the architect’s own cost is reinforced
by the need to manage these costs throughout the duration of the project. Allocation,
commitment, and monitoring of the expenditure of resources are of critical impor-
tance to the financial success of every project. Only when these are properly man-
aged can quality services, proper advice, appropriate design, and state-of-the-art
contract documents be delivered to clients.
    As a businessperson, an architect is faced with acquiring personnel, advancing
those who are outstanding, and removing those who are unacceptable. The firm
should keep records of business expenses, file tax returns, provide employee ben-
efits, distribute and account for profits, and keep accurate cost records for project
planning and to satisfy government requirements. The architect must meet legal
requirements for practice as an individual, partnership, or corporation. In many of
these areas, the architect will be assisted by experts. It is impossible for an architect
to practice effectively or successfully without a thorough understanding and com-
plete concern for the business of architecture.
    Once the resources required to deliver services are assured, the architect should
provide management skills to see that these services are kept timely, well-
coordinated, accurate, and closely related to the client’s needs. This is especially
important for work on large projects, in large design offices, or when dealing with
2.14                                SECTION TWO


the architect’s employees and consultants. The best talent must be secured, appro-
priately organized, directed, and coordinated to see that the project receives well-
integrated and well-directed professional service.
    The objective is to produce an appropriately designed facility the client needs,
within budget, and on schedule. While the contractor has the front-line responsi-
bility for budgeted construction cost and schedule, the architect’s resources and the
services provided should be helpful in managing the construction process for the
benefit of the client. The architect’s management of materials and technology and
relationship with the client and contractors will account in good measure for the
success of the project.



2.11   INTERNAL RECORD KEEPING

Part of good office management is document control and record keeping. Much
information is received, disseminated, and collated in an architect’s office. Included
are project directories, contractual correspondence, client correspondence, consult-
ant correspondence, minutes of meetings, insurance certifications, in-progress draw-
ings, drawing release for owner review, and building permit and construction issues.
Also dealt with are facsimiles, e-mail, computer tapes, calculations, shop drawings,
specifications, material samples, renderings, photography, slides, field reports, spec-
ifications addenda, contract modifications, invoices, financial statements, audit rec-
ords, and time records. In addition, there are contractor payment requests, change
orders, personnel records, client references and more. Certain clients may have
particular formats or record-keeping controls they impose on a project in addition
to the architect’s standard procedures.
    A multitude of data is transferred among many parties during the progress of
the architect’s services. The data should be maintained in an organized manner for
future reference and archival purposes. The architect should establish an office
procedure for document control, record keeping, and document storage beyond the
life of the project to ensure easy retrieval. There are many computerized systems
that can aid the architect in catalog filing and information retrieval. Record keeping
can typically be subdivided into the following categories: contractual, financial,
personnel, marketing and publicity, legal, correspondence, project documentation,
drawings, shop drawings, warehousing, and archival records. These should not only
be supervised but also controlled, inasmuch as some files require limited access for
reasons of confidentiality and legalities.



2.12   CODES AND REGULATIONS

Various statutory codes, regulations, statutes, laws, and guidelines affect design and
construction of projects. In most jurisdictions, the architect and engineer are re-
quired by law to design to applicable building codes and regulations, which vary
from one jurisdiction to another and can vary between codes. Some jurisdictions
that do not have sophisticated codes usually follow recognized national or inter-
national codes, which should be agreed on at the onset of a project so that the
client and architect understand the rules for design and construction. All codes are
intended for the health, welfare, and safety of the public and occupants of buildings.
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                     2.15


Affirmative-Action Program. The objective of equal employment opportunity and
affirmative-action programs should be to ensure that individuals are recruited, hired,
and promoted for all job classifications without regard to race, color, religion, na-
tional origin, sex, age, handicap, or veteran status. Employment decisions should
be based solely on an individual’s qualifications for the position for which the
individual is considered.
    Affirmative action means more than equal employment opportunity. It means
making a concentrated effort to inform the community of the architect’s desire to
foster equal employment opportunity. It also means making a special effort to attract
individuals to the profession and to engage them in a program of professional
development. Furthermore, architects should be committed to a meaningful minority
business enterprise (MBE) and women business enterprise (WBE) participation pro-
gram. Initial contact with local MBE / WBE firms should be pursued for each ap-
plicable project to respond to this important requirement. Architects should be pre-
pared to review this requirement with clients to achieve participation targets
consistent with client goals and objectives.



2.13   PERMITS

Most jurisdictions require a building permit for construction or remodeling. The
building permit, for which a fee is paid by the contractor or client, is an indication
that drawings showing the work to be done have been prepared by a registered
professional and submitted to the governing authority have jurisdiction over design
and construction of the project. Furthermore, it is an indication that this authority
stipulates that the documents meet the intent of the applicable building codes and
regulations. Issuance of a permit, however, does not relieve the governing agency
of the right to inspect the project during and after construction and to require minor
modifications. In addition, while most locales do not provide for a written permit
by the fire department, this agency is involved in the review process relative to life-
safety provisions. It also has the right to inspect the project when constructed and
to require modifications if they are considered appropriate to meet the intent of the
code or the department’s specific requirements. Major items reviewed by both the
permit-issuing agencies relate to occupancy classifications, building population, fire
separations, exiting requirements, travel paths for exiting, areas of refuse, and other
general life safety and public health issues.

Occupancy Permits. Many jurisdictions require that a permit be obtained by the
client or tenant of a multitenant building indicating that the building or tenant space
has been reviewed by the applicable agency and fire department. This permit in-
dicates that the building meets the requirements of the building codes and is ap-
propriate for occupancy for the intended use and classification for which the build-
ing or space was designed and constructed.
    In addition, elevator usage certificates are issued by certain building authorities.
These certificates indicate that the elevators have been inspected and found to be
acceptable for use based on the size, loading, and number of occupants posted on
the certificate.
    Furthermore, certain spaces within a project may have a maximum-occupancy
limitation for which a notice is posted in those spaces by the applicable building
authority. Examples of this type of usage include restaurants, ballrooms, convention
2.16                               SECTION TWO


centers, and indoor sports facilities where a large number of occupants might be
gathered for the intended use.


2.14   ENERGY CONSERVATION

In response to the national need for energy conservation and in recognition of the
high consumption of energy in buildings, the U.S. Department of Energy gave a
grant to the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air-Conditioning
Engineers (ASHRAE) for development of a national energy conservation standard
for new buildings. The resulting standard, ASHRAE 90-75, establishes thermal
design requirements for exterior walls and roofs. It is incorporated in some building
codes.
   Seeking greater energy-use reduction, Congress passed the Energy Conservation
Standards for New Buildings Act of 1976, mandating development of energy per-
formance standards for new buildings (BEPS). Accordingly, the Department of En-
ergy develops such standards, for adoption by federal agencies and state and local
building codes. BEPS consists of three fundamental elements:
1. Energy budget levels for different classifications of buildings in different cli-
   mates, expressed as rate of energy consumption, Btu / ft2-yr.
2. A method for applying these energy budget levels to a specific building design
   to obtain a specific annual rate of energy consumption, or design energy budget,
   for the proposed building.
3. A method for calculating the estimated annual rate of energy consumption, or
   design energy consumption, of the proposed building.
   The design energy consumption may not exceed the design energy budget of a
new building. Even without these regulations, energy conservation for buildings
makes good sense, for a reduction in energy usage also reduces building operating
costs. It is worthwhile, therefore, to spend more on a building initially to save
energy over its service life, at least to the point where the amortized annual value
of the increased investment equals the annual savings in energy costs. As a con-
sequence, life-cycle cost, considered the sum of initial, operating, and maintenance
costs, may be given preference over initial cost in establishment of a cost budget
for a proposed building.
   Energy use and conservation are key elements in an architect’s approach to
design. Aided by computer simulation, engineers can develop system concepts and
evaluate system performance, deriving optimal operation schedules and procedures.
During the initial design phase, the computer can be used in feasibility studies
involving energy programs, preliminary load calculations for the selection of heat-
ing, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems and equipment, technical and
economic evaluation of conservation alternatives. Using solar heating and cooling
systems for new and existing facilities, modeling energy consumption levels, fore-
casting probable operating costs, and developing energy recovery systems can be
investigated during the early design of a project.


2.15   THE INTERIOR ENVIRONMENT

Architects have long been leaders in building design that is sensitive to environ-
mental issues. Several areas of general concern for all buildings are described in
              THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                    2.17


the following paragraphs; they support the basic philosophy that the environment
within buildings is as critical a concern as esthetics.

Indoor Air Quality. Many factors, such as temperature, air velocity, fresh-air ven-
tilation rates, relative humidity, and noise, affect indoor air quality. The fresh-air
ventilation rate has the greatest influence on indoor air quality in many buildings.
Fresh-air ventilation rates in a building is the flow of outside air brought into the
building for the well-being of the occupants and the dilution of odors and other
internally generated air pollutants. The outside air may vary in its ‘‘freshness’’
depending on the location of the building, its surrounding conditions, and the lo-
cation of the fresh-air intakes for the building. Therefore, careful studies should be
made by the architect to ensure the optimum internal air quality.
    Ventilation is required to combat not only occupant-generated odors, as has been
traditionally the case, but also to provide ventilation for materials used and stored
in buildings. ASHRAE Standard 62-1989, American Society of Heating, Refrig-
eration, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, recommends a rate of 20 cfm per person
as a minimum ventilation rate for office buildings. Air-handling systems for nu-
merous buildings provide not only this minimum recommended level but also often
increased fan capacity (available when outdoor temperatures and humidity levels
are favorable) through an air-side economizer control.

Environmental Pollution. In response to current concern for the effect of chlo-
rofluorocarbons (CFCs, fully halogenated refrigerants) on the earth’s ozone layer,
the refrigerant for mechanical systems should have the lowest ozone depletion po-
tential compatible with commercial building cooling systems.

Noise Control. The acoustical environment within a building is a result of the
noise entering the space from outdoors, or from adjacent interior areas, or most
importantly, from the mechanical, electrical, and elevator systems of the building.
This is in addition to the noise generated within the space by people and equipment.
Mechanical systems should be designed to limit equipment noise and to maintain
the transmission of noise via mechanical systems to occupied spaces within a range
necessary for efficient and enjoyable use of the building. Occupied space noise
should normally be limited to NC-35 or less if desired, through the use of state-
of-the-art-distribution equipment and appropriate use of materials within the fin-
ished spaces.

Safe Building Materials. The technical specifications provided by the architect
should be continually updated to eliminate any materials that are potential health
hazards to occupants or construction workers, such as materials that give off gas
within the occupied spaces. In addition, requirements in local, national, and inter-
national building codes to reduce fire and smoke hazards should be met.

Occupational Health and Safety Issues. As discussed in the preceding, architects
should exercise professional care in design and specification of all architectural and
building systems to create a state-of-the-art building offering a safe, healthy envi-
ronment for all occupants, visitors, and users.

Recycled Materials. In today’s environment, architects should understand that
their designs must consider the impact on the ecological health of our society. With
this in mind, architects should work together with the client to develop policies and
innovative solutions that will reduce waste and promote the recycling of materials.
2.18                                SECTION TWO


2.16     COST ESTIMATING AND VALUE
         ENGINEERING

During development of a project the client normally looks to the architect for
construction cost estimates. It is advisable to provide a probable cost of construction
at completion of the schematic design, design development, and construction doc-
ument phases. A design contingency is usually carried in cost estimates. It can be
reduced as the documents are further developed. At completion of the construction
documents, the architect prepares, or has a consultant prepare, a final and most
accurate estimate of construction cost, which can be used for comparison with the
bids submitted to perform the work.
    Value engineering may be performed by consultants and construction managers
during the development of the construction documents. (This is a misnomer for
cost-reduction engineering, since value engineering should occur before a design
has been finalized and construction documents have started. To be effective, value
engineering should be undertaken prior to design of any building system.
    Value engineering should address operating and maintenance costs as well as
first costs, to provide true life-cycle cost estimates for comparative analysis. This
can be accomplished as early as the conceptual design phase of the project and
should use the expertise of cost consultants, if such service is not offered directly
by the architect or engineer.
    Cost analysis should be performed concurrently with technical evaluation of the
systems proposed by the architects or engineers, to provide the client with proper
information to make an informed decision. The architect and engineer should ad-
dress cost without compromising the building program, building safety, or desired
design and performance of the facility and respond to the client in a professional
manner regarding cost estimating and value engineering.


2.17     TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

Specifications for a building project are written descriptions, and the drawings are
a diagrammatic presentation of the construction work required for that project. The
drawings and specifications are complementary.
   Specifications are addressed to the prime contractor. Presenting a written de-
scription of the project in an orderly and logical manner, they are organized into
divisions and sections representing, in the opinion of the specification writer, the
trades that will be involved in construction. Proper organization of the specifications
facilitates cost estimating and aids in preparation of bids. The architect should
coordinate the specification terminology with that shown on the drawings.


2.17.1   Content of Specifications

It is not practical for an architect or engineer to include sufficient notes on the
drawings to describe in complete detail all of the products and methods required
of a construction project. Detailed descriptions should be incorporated in specifi-
cations. For example, workmanship required should be stated in the specifications.
    Contractors study specifications to determine details or materials required, se-
quence of work, quality of workmanship, and appearance of the end product. From
this information, contractors can estimate costs of the various skills and labor re-
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                     2.19


quired. If workmanship is not determined properly, unrealistic costs will result and
quality will suffer. Good specifications expand or clarify drawing notes, define
quality of materials and workmanship, establish the scope of the work, and describe
the responsibilities of the contractor.
    The terms of the contract documents should obligate each contractor to guarantee
to the client and the architect or engineer that all labor and materials furnished and
the work performed are in accordance with the requirements of the contract doc-
uments. In addition, a guarantee should also provide that if any defects develop
from use of inferior materials, equipment, or workmanship during the guarantee
period (1 year or more from the date of final completion of the contract or final
occupancy of the building by the client, whichever is earlier), the contractor must,
as required by the contract, restore all unsatisfactory work to a satisfactory condition
or replace it with acceptable materials. Also, the contractor should repair or replace
any damage resulting from the inferior work and should restore any work or equip-
ment or contents disturbed in fulfilling the guarantee.
    Difficult and time-consuming to prepare, technical specifications supply a written
description of the project, lacking only a portrayal of its physical shape and its
dimensions. The specifications describe in detail the material, whether concealed
or exposed, in the project and fixed equipment needed for the normal functioning
of the project. If they are properly prepared, well-organized, comprehensive, and
indexed, the applicable requirements for any type of work, kind of material, or
piece of equipment in a project can be easily located.
    The technical specifications cover the major types of work—architectural, civil,
structural, mechanical, and electrical. Each of these types is further divided and
subdivided in the technical specifications and given a general title that describes
work performed by specific building trades or technicians, such as plasterers, tile
setters, plumbers, carpenters, masons, and sheet-metal workers, to name a few.
    The prime contractor has the responsibility to perform all work, to furnish all
materials, and to complete the project within a schedule. The contractor, therefore,
has the right to select subcontractors or perform the work with the contractor’s own
forces. In recognition of this, each specification should contain a statement either
in the General Conditions or in the Special Conditions, that, regardless of the sub-
division of the technical specifications, the contractor shall be responsible for al-
location of the work to avoid delays due to conflict with local customs, rules, and
union jurisdictional regulations and decisions.
    Standard forms for technical specifications can be obtained from the Construc-
tion Specifications Institute (CSI). The CSI publishes a Master List of Section Titles
and Numbers, which is the generally accepted industry standard. In it, technical
specifications are organized into 16 divisions, each with titles that identify a major
class of work. Each division contains basic units of work, called sections, related
to the work described by the division title. Following is the division format devel-
oped by CSI:
 1.   General Requirements
 2.   Site Work
 3.   Concrete
 4.   Masonry
 5.   Metals
 6.   Woods and Plastics
 7.   Thermal and Moisture Protection
 8.   Doors and Windows
2.20                                 SECTION TWO


 9.    Finishes
10.    Specialties
11.    Equipment
12.    Furnishings
13.    Special Construction
14.    Conveying Systems
15.    Mechanical
16.    Electrical
    Language should be clear and concise. Good specifications contain as few words
as necessary to describe the materials and the work. The architect or engineer
should use the term ‘‘shall’’ when specifying the contractor’s duties and responsi-
bilities under the contract and use the term ‘‘will’’ to specify the client’s or archi-
tect’s responsibilities.
    Phrases such as ‘‘as directed by the architect,’’ ‘‘. . . to the satisfaction of the
architect,’’ or ‘‘. . . approved by the architect’’ should be avoided. The specification
should be comprehensive and adequate in scope to eliminate the necessity of using
these phrases. ‘‘Approved by the architect’’ may be used, however, if it is accom-
panied by a specification that indicates what the architect would consider in a
professional evaluation. The term ‘‘by others’’ is not clear or definite and, when
used, can result in extra costs to the client. The word ‘‘any’’ should not be used
when ‘‘all’’ is meant.


2.17.2     Types of Specifications

Technical requirements may be specified in different ways, depending on what best
meets the client’s requirements. One or more of the following types of technical
specifications may be used for a building project.

Descriptive Specifications. These describe the components of a product and how
they are assembled. The specification writer specifies the physical and chemical
properties of the materials, size of each member, size and spacing of fastening
devices, exact relationship of moving parts, sequence of assembly, and many other
requirements. The contractor has the responsibility of constructing the work in
accordance with this description. The architect or engineer assumes total respon-
sibility for the function and performance of the end product. Usually, architects and
engineers do not have the resources, laboratory, or technical staff capable of con-
ducting research on the specified materials or products. Therefore, unless the spec-
ification writer is very sure the assembled product will function properly, descriptive
specifications should not be used.

Reference Specifications. These employ standards of recognized authorities to
specify quality. Among these authorities are ASTM, American National Standards
Institute, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Underwriters Laborato-
ries, Inc., American Institute of Steel Construction, American Concrete Institute,
and American Institute of Timber Construction.
    An example of a reference specification is: Cement shall be portland cement
conforming to ASTM C150, ‘‘Specification for Portland Cement,’’ using Type 1 or
Type 11 for general concrete construction.
              THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                    2.21


    Reputable companies state in their literature that their products conform to spe-
cific recognized standards and furnish independent laboratory reports supporting
their claims. The buyer is assured that the products conform to minimum require-
ments and that the buyer will be able to use them consistently and expect the same
end result. Reference specifications generally are used in conjunction with one or
more of the other types of specifications.

Proprietary Specifications. These specify materials, equipment, and other prod-
ucts by trade name, model number, and manufacturer. This type of specification
simplifies the specification writer’s task, because commercially available products
set the standard of quality acceptable to the architect or engineer.
    Sometimes proprietary specifications can cause complications because manufac-
turers reserve the right to change their products without notice, and the product
incorporated in the project may not be what the specifier believed would be in-
stalled. Another disadvantage of proprietary specifications is that they may permit
use of alternative products that are not equal in every respect. Therefore, the spe-
cifier should be familiar with the products and their past performance under similar
use and should know whether they have had a history of satisfactory service. The
specifier should also take into consideration the reputation of the manufacturers or
subcontractors for giving service and their attitude toward repair or replacement of
defective or inferior work.
    Under a proprietary specification, the architect or engineer is responsible to the
client for the performance of the material or product specified and for checking the
installation to see that it conforms with the specification. The manufacturer of the
product specified by the model number has the responsibility of providing the per-
formance promised in its literature.
    In general, the specification writer has the responsibility of maintaining com-
petition between manufacturers and subcontractors to help keep costs in line. Nam-
ing only one supplier may result in a high price. Two or more names are normally
supplied for each product to enhance competition.
    Use of ‘‘or equal’’ should be avoided. It is not fully satisfactory in controlling
quality of materials and equipment, though it saves time in preparing the specifi-
cation. Only one or two products need to be investigated and research time needed
to review other products is postponed.

Base-Bid Specifications. These establish acceptable materials and equipment by
naming one or more (often three) manufacturers and fabricators. The bidder is
required to prepare a proposal with prices submitted from these suppliers. Usually,
base-bid specifications permit the bidder to submit substitutions or alternatives for
the specified products. When this is done, the bidder should state in the proposal
the price to be added to, or deducted from, the base bid and include the name,
type, manufacturer, and descriptive data for the substitutions. Final selection rests
with the client. Base-bid specifications often provide the greatest control of quality
of materials and equipment, but there are many pros and cons for the various types
of specifications, and there are many variations of them.


2.17.3   Automated Specifications

For building projects, specification writers normally maintain a library of master
documents that are used as a basis for creating project specifications with a com-
puter. Typically, they employ the industry-standard Construction Specifications In-
2.22                               SECTION TWO


stitute format (Art. 2.17.1). Computers are used to facilitate and speed production
of specifications and other technical documents.
    Although computer systems can be complex, requiring an experienced person
for setup and maintenance, they are cost-effective, saving time and effort. For ex-
ample, one program used for preparing specifications has a point-and-click graphics
user interface with directories and files represented by icons and manipulated by a
mouse. Multiple files are viewed and edited on the screen simultaneously, and each
file is seen as a full-page display exactly as it will be printed. The graphics and
document layout capabilities of the program are suitable for producing technical
manuals and for publishing periodicals. Documents displayed on the computer per-
mit the architect to eliminate the editing of drafts on paper or markups. Instead,
editing is performed directly on the computer screen, thus reducing the amount of
paper filing and printing that would otherwise be required.



2.18   UPFRONT DOCUMENTS

The contract documents prepared by the architect, engineer, or client’s legal counsel
include the contract between the client and contractor; the bidding requirements,
which contain the invitation to bid, instruction to bidders, general information, bid
forms, and bid bond; the contract forms, which may include the agreement (con-
tract) format between the client and contractor, performance bond, and payment
bond and certificates; the contract conditions identified as the general and supple-
mentary conditions; the list of technical specifications; drawings; addenda; and con-
tract modifications. The bidding requirements, contract forms, and contract condi-
tions are sometimes referred to as the upfront documents.

Bidding Requirements. These explain the procedures bidders are to follow in
preparing and submitting their bid. They assist all bidders in following established
guidelines so that bids can be submitted for comparative purposes and not be dis-
qualified because of technicalities. The bidding requirements address all prospective
bidders, whereas the final contract documents address only the successful bidder,
who, after signing the client-contractor agreement, becomes the contractor.

Contract Forms. The agreement (contract) is the written document, signed by the
client and contractor, which is the legal instrument binding the two parties. This
contract defines the relationships and obligations that exist between the client and
contractor. It incorporates other contract documents by reference.
    The contract may require a construction performance bond for financial protec-
tion of the client in the event the contractor is unable to complete the work in
accordance with the contract. Not all clients require performance bonds, but the
architect should review its necessity with the client and prepare the bidding docu-
ments in accordance with the client’s decision.
    The contract usually requires a contractor payment bond from the contractor to
ensure that a surety will pay the labor force and material suppliers should the
contractor fail to pay them. The use of this bond precludes the need for the labor
force or suppliers to seek payment directly from the client, through liens or oth-
erwise, because of nonpayment by the contractor.
    Certificates include those project forms that may be required for insurance, cer-
tificate of compliance, guarantees or warranties, or compliance with applicable
              THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                    2.23


laws and regulations. Contract forms vary, depending on the type and usage of the
project.

Contract Conditions. These define the rights, responsibilities, and relationships
of the various parties involved in the construction process. Two types of contract
conditions exist, General Conditions and Supplementary Conditions.
   The General Conditions have general clauses that establish how the project is
to be administered. They normally contain provisions that are common practice.
Definitions of project terms, temporary provisions, site security, management pro-
cess required, and warranties and guarantees are among those items addressed in
the General Conditions.
   The Supplementary Conditions modify or supplement the general conditions to
provide for requirements unique to a specific project and not normally found in
standard General Conditions.



2.19   QUALITY CONTROL FOR ARCHITECTS
       AND ENGINEERS

To maintain a consistently high level of quality in design and construction docu-
mentation, a rigorous internal review of the documents prepared by the architect or
engineer, which draws on the full depth and experience of resources available,
should be undertaken during the contract document phase. Quality control can begin
in the earliest stages of design, when criteria are established and developed as
design guidelines for use throughout the project. At each stage of development, a
coordination checklist, based on previous experience, can be utilized for the project
through an independent internal or external technical checking program.
   Computer file management may be used to enable the various technical disci-
plines to share graphic data and check for interference conditions, thereby enhanc-
ing technical coordination of the documents. Quality control should also continue
throughout the construction phase with architect and engineer review of shop draw-
ings and on-site observation of the work.

Quality Management Program. To have a truly meaningful quality management
program, all personnel must be committed to it. To help the professional staff
understand the quality program, quality systems should be developed, updated,
maintained, and administered to assist the architect and professional staff in pro-
viding quality service to clients. An individual in each office may be assigned to
assist in the quality management program. This person should undertake to instill
in all personnel the importance of such a program in every aspect of the daily
conduct of business.
   The quality management program should set quality goals; develop professional
interaction for meeting these goals among peers and peer groups; review building
systems, specifications, and drawings to ensure quality; and see that these objectives
are known to the public. Such a program will result in a client base that will
communicate the quality level of the architect to others in the community, profes-
sion, and international marketplace. The architect’s image is of extreme importance
in acquiring and maintaining clients, and the best quality management program
focuses on client service and dedication to the profession.
2.24                                SECTION TWO


2.20   BIDDING AND CONTRACT AWARD

Competitive bidding is one method of determining the least cost for performing
work defined by the construction documents. The bid states the price that the bidder
will contract for to perform the work based on the work shown and described in
the bidding documents. Bids are prepared in confidence by each bidder. They are
usually sealed when submitted to the client (or, in the case of subcontractors, to
the bidding contractors). At a specified time and date, all bids are opened, com-
petitively examined, and compared. Unless there are compelling reasons to do oth-
erwise, the client (contractor in the case of subcontractors) usually enters into an
agreement to have the work performed by the bidder submitting the lowest price.
    Before bids may be received, prospective bidders need to be identified and made
aware of the project. Sufficient data should be furnished to potential bidders to
allow preparation of their bids. The client may or may not wish to prequalify
bidders. In those cases where prequalification is required, the architect can have
meaningful input in the process based on past experience with potential bidders.
    The terms bid and proposal are synonymous. Although proposal may imply an
opportunity for more consideration and discussion with the client, architect, or
engineer, bid, bidder, and bid form are preferable, to prevent misunderstanding by
the bidders.
    After client approval of the construction documents and selection of a construc-
tion bidding method, the architect may assist in the selection of contractors to bid
the work; preparation of bid forms; issuance of bidding documents for competitive
bidding; answering inquiries from bidders; and preparing and issuing any necessary
addenda to the bidding documents. Furthermore, the architect may assist in ana-
lyzing bid proposals and making recommendations to the client as to the award of
the construction contract. The architect can also assist in preparation of the con-
struction contract.
    Bidders may elect to change their bid on the basis of certain conditions, such
as errors in the bid, changes in product cost, changes in labor rates, or nonavail-
ability of labor because of other work or strikes. Each bidder is responsible for
providing for any eventuality during the period the bid is open for acceptance.
Unless provided for otherwise, bidders may withdraw their bid before acceptance
by the client, unless the client consents to a later withdrawal. If all conditions of
the instructions to bidders have been met, then after the bids have been opened,
the bids should be evaluated. The low bid especially should be analyzed to ensure
that it reflects accurately the cost of the work required by the contract documents.
The bids may be compared with the architect’s construction cost estimate that was
prepared on completion of the contract documents. The client can accept a bid and
award the contract to the selected bidder, who then becomes the contractor for the
work.




2.21   CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULING

Normally, a client asks the architect for an estimate of the construction time for the
project. The client can then incorporate this estimate in the overall development
schedule.
              THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                     2.25


    The contractor should prepare a detailed construction schedule for use in ad-
ministering the work of subcontractors and the contractor’s own forces. The con-
tractor should be requested to submit the schedule to the architect and the client
within 30 days of contract award. The schedule will also form the basis for the
contractor’s development of a shop drawing schedule.
    A construction schedule can consist simply of a bar chart for each item of work
or a breakdown for the major trades on the project. Alternatively, the schedule can
be highly detailed; for example, a critical-path-method (CPM) schedule. This is
recommended for large projects for monitoring the critical-path item at any point
in time, since the critical path can change, depending on actual construction con-
ditions. The contractor should monitor and update the schedule monthly during the
construction phase so that the anticipated completion and move-in date can be
verified or adjusted. If the completion date cannot be adjusted and the schedule
appears to be of concern, more work time (overtime) may be required to maintain
the nonadjusted schedule. This could have an impact on cost, depending on how
the client-contract agreement was structured.
    The construction schedule is an extremely meaningful tool in monitoring the
construction process. It can assist the architect’s ongoing role in quality control
during the construction phase, when the management of the building process is
transferred to, and becomes the responsibility of, the contractor. The schedule also
is a meaningful tool for use by all trades involved in the building process. The
schedule affects trades in different ways, depending on the size of the labor force,
availability of material and personnel hoisting equipment, access to the work, co-
ordination of subcontractors’ work with material suppliers, material testing agencies
involved, preparation of mock-ups, shop-drawing submittals, and general overall
construction coordination issues.


2.22   SHOP DRAWING REVIEW

After the construction contract is awarded, the contractor should submit a proposed
schedule for submission of shop drawings to meet the construction schedule. This
permits the architect to anticipate submissions and plan manpower requirements
accordingly, based on the number and complexity of each submission.
   As an ongoing part of quality control, the architect should review the shop
drawings, product literature, and samples and observe material and mock-up testing.
This is considered part of the shop drawing submittal process. The architect should
be an independent agent and side neither with the client nor the contractor in
acceptance or rejection of a submittal. Rather, based on professional judgment, the
architect should render a decision as to whether the submittal is in general accord-
ance with the construction documents and design intent. All submittals should be
properly identified and recorded when received by the architect, as part of document
control. The architect should review the submittal expeditiously and return it to the
contractor with the appropriate action.
   The architect’s action shown on the submittal usually records that the contractor
can proceed, proceed as noted, or not proceed. A copy of the proceed and proceed-
as-noted submittal should be maintained in the architect’s and contractor’s site office
for reference. The client should also be provided with the transmittal associated
with submittals. This helps keep the client informed regarding the progress of the
work relative to the schedule for submission of shop drawings.
2.26                                SECTION TWO


2.23     ROLE OF ARCHITECT OR ENGINEER
         DURING CONSTRUCTION

After award of the construction contract, the architect or engineer generally contin-
ues to assist the client in relations with the contractor.


2.23.1   Site Observation

As part of their ongoing services during construction, and depending on the scale
and complexity of the project, architects and engineers may make periodic site visits
or maintain full-time representation on site during a portion or all of the construc-
tion period. The professional’s role is to expedite day-to-day communication and
decision making by having on-site personnel available to respond to required draw-
ing and specification clarifications.
    Site-observation requirements for the project should be discussed with the client
at the onset of the project and be outlined in the architect-client agreement. Many
clients prefer periodic or regularly scheduled site visits by the design professional.
A provision for additional or full-time on-site representation, however, can be ad-
dressed in the agreement, and compensation for this additional service can be out-
lined in the agreement for discussion with the client later in the development pro-
cess or during the construction phase. The client and the architect and engineer
should agree on the appropriate amount of site visitation provided in the architect’s
basic services to allow adequate site-observation services based on specific project
conditions.
    If periodic site observations are made, the architect should report such obser-
vations to the client in written form. This should call attention to items observed
that do not meet the intent of the construction documents. It is normally left to the
client to reject or replace work unless such defective work involves life safety,
health, or welfare of the building occupants or is a defect involving structural in-
tegrity. If the architect provides full-time site observation services, daily or weekly
reports should be issued to the client outlining items observed that are not in ac-
cordance with the construction documents or design intent.


2.23.2   Site Record Keeping

Depending on contractual requirements for service during the construction phase,
the architect may establish a field office. In this event, dual record keeping is
suggested between the site and architect’s office so that records required for daily
administration of construction are readily accessible on site. Contractor correspon-
dence, field reports, testing and balancing reports, shop drawings, record documents,
contractor payment requests, change orders, bulletin issues, field meeting minutes,
and schedules are used continually during construction. Computer systems and elec-
tronic mail make the communication process somewhat easy to control.


2.23.3   Inspection and Testing

Technical specifications require testing and inspection of various material and build-
ing systems during construction to verify that the intent of the design and construc-
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                     2.27


tion documents is being fulfilled under field conditions. Testing is required where
visual observations cannot verify actual conditions. Subsurface conditions, concrete
and steel testing, welding, air infiltration, and air and water balancing of mechanical
systems are such building elements that require inspection and testing services.
Normally, these services are performed by an independent testing agency employed
directly by the client so that third-party evaluation can be obtained.
   Although the architect does not become involved in the conduct of work or
determine the means or methods of construction, the architect has the general re-
sponsibility to the client to see that the work is installed in general accordance with
the contract documents.
   Other areas of inspection and testing involve establishing and checking bench-
marks for horizontal and vertical alignment, examining soils and backfill material,
compaction testing, examining subsurface retention systems, inspecting connections
to public utilities, verifying subsoil drainage, verifying structural column centerlines
and base-plate locations (if applicable), checking alignment and bracing of concrete
formwork, verifying concrete strength and quality, and other similar items.


2.23.4   Payment Requests

The contractor normally submits a consolidated payment request monthly to the
architect and client for review and certification. The payment request should be
subdivided by trade and compared with the schedule of values for each trade that
would have been submitted with the subcontractor bid if required by the instructions
to bidders and bid form. The architect should review the payment request with
respect to the percentage of completion of the pertinent work item or trade.
    Some clients or lending institutions require that a partial waiver of lien be sub-
mitted for each work item or trade with each payment request. This partial waiver
of lien can either be for the prior monthly request, which will indicate that the prior
month’s payment has been received, or in certain cases for the current monthly
request. If the latter procedure is followed, the waiver may require revision, de-
pending on the architect’s review, if a work-item or trade-payment request is mod-
ified. The architect is not expected to audit the payment request or check the math-
ematical calculations for accuracy.


2.23.5   Change Orders

Contractor’s change-order requests require the input of the architect, engineer, and
client and are usually acted on as part of the payment request procedure. A change
order is the instrument for amending the original contract amount and schedule, as
submitted with the bid and agreed on in the client-contractor contract. Change
orders can result from departures from the contract documents ordered during con-
struction, by the architect, engineer, or client; errors or omissions; field conditions;
unforeseen subsoil; or other similar conditions.
    A change order outlines the nature of the change and the effect, if any, on the
contract amount and construction schedule. Change orders can occur with both a
zero cost and zero schedule change. Nevertheless, they should be documented in
writing and approved by the contractor, architect, and client to acknowledge that
the changes were made, with no impact. Change orders are also used to permit a
material substitution when a material or system not included in the contract docu-
ments is found acceptable by the client and architect. For material substitutions
2.28                                SECTION TWO


proposed by the contractor, schedule revisions are not normally recognized as a
valid change.
    The sum of the change-order amounts is added or deducted from the original
contract amount. Then, the revised contract amount is carried forward on the con-
tractor’s consolidated application for payment after the change orders have been
signed by all parties. The normal contractor payment request procedure is then
followed, on the basis of the new contract amount. If the schedule is changed
because of a change order, the subsequent issue of the construction schedule should
indicate the revised completion or move-in date, or both, that result from the ap-
proved change.


2.23.6   Project Closeout

Project closeout involves all parties, including subcontractors and material suppliers.
It should be addressed early in the construction phase so that the closeout can be
expedited and documented in an organized and meaningful manner. At this point
in the construction process, the attention of the contractor and architect is focused
on accomplishing the necessary paperwork and administrative functions required
for final acceptance of the work and issuance of the contractor’s final consolidated
application for payment and final waiver of lien.
    The normal project closeout proceeds as follows:

     1. The contractor formally notifies the architect and the client that the con-
tracted work is substantially complete.
     2. From on-site observations and representations made by the contractor, the
architect documents substantial completion with the client and the contractor. In
some cases, this may trigger the start of certain guarantees or warranties, depending
on the provisions of the general and supplementary conditions of the contract.
     3. For some projects that are phased, some but not all the building systems
may be recognized by the architect and the client as being substantially complete.
This should be well-documented, since start dates for warranty and guarantee
periods for various building systems or equipment may vary.
     4. On-site visits are made by the architect and representatives of the client,
sometimes called a walk-through, and a final punchlist is developed by the architect
to document items requiring remedial work or replacement to meet the requirement
of the construction documents.
     5. A complete keying schedule, with master, submaster, room, and specialty
keys, is documented by the contractor and delivered to the client.
     6. The contractor submits all record drawings, as-builts, testing and balancing
reports, and other administrative paperwork required by the contract documents.
     7. The contractor should submit all required guarantees, warranties, certificates,
and bonds required by the general and supplementary conditions of the contract or
technical specifications for each work item or trade outlined in the breakdown of
the contractor’s consolidated final payment request.
     8. The contractor corrects all work noted on the punchlist. A final observation
of the corrected work may then be made by the architect and client.
     9. If the client accepts the work, the architect sends a certificate of completion
to the contractor with a copy to the client. The certificate documents that final
               THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                     2.29


completion of the work has occurred. All required operating manuals and mainte-
nance instructions are given to the architect for document control and forwarding
to the client.
   10. The contractor submits final waivers of lien from each subcontractor or
material supplier. Also provided is an affidavit stating that all invoices have been
paid, with the exception of those amounts shown on the final waiver of lien. With
these documents, the contractor submits the final consolidated payment request,
including all change orders.
   11. The architect sends a final certificate of payment to the client, with a copy
to the contractor.
   12. The contractor provides any required certificate of occupancy, indicating that
the building authorities have jurisdiction over the project approve occupancy of the
space for the intended use.
   13. The client makes final payment to the contractor and notifies the architect
of this.
   This process is important inasmuch as it can trigger the transfer of risk from the
contractor’s insurance program during construction to the client’s insurance program
for the completed project.



2.24   TESTING AND BALANCING OF BUILDING
       SYSTEMS

It is normal for projects to go through what is known as a shakedown period after
final acceptance and occupancy by the client or building tenant. The warranty and
guarantee period (normally 1 year) is the contractor’s representation and recognition
that certain building elements and systems may need adjustment or slight modifi-
cation, depending on actual occupancy conditions or normal maintenance and usage
of such systems. The heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and systems unique to
a project require testing and balancing and potential minor modifications and ad-
justments during this warranty and guarantee period, even though they were tested
and balanced by the contractor’s testing agency prior to project closeout. An in-
dependent testing and balancing contractor who was employed prior to final project
closeout normally returns on an as-needed, on-call basis to adjust, test, and balance
systems during the first year. In addition, the building engineer will become familiar
with the systems during this first year of operation and may also adjust and balance
systems.



2.25   POSTCONSTRUCTION OPERATION AND
       MAINTENANCE

The technical specifications for a building project normally require that some time
be devoted prior to project closeout for instruction and training of the client’s build-
ing operating personnel and building engineer, who will be responsible for operating
and maintaining the various building systems. Manufacturers’ operating procedures,
manuals, and inventory of spare parts and attic stock should be reviewed with the
2.30                                SECTION TWO


client, building engineer, and the contractor installing the work. The building en-
gineer should thus gain a general understanding of the individual systems and their
interaction in the operation of the building. During the warranty and guarantee
period, the contractor or applicable subcontractor may be requested to assist the
building engineer further in operation and maintenance of a system, including test-
ing, balancing, and minor adjustment. After the shakedown period and when the
engineer thoroughly understands system operation, the client’s personnel assume
full responsibility and deal directly with the manufacturers of various building com-
ponents for maintenance. Or the client may subcontract maintenance, a normal
procedure for such systems as elevators and escalators where specialty expertise in
maintenance is required.



2.26   RECORD DRAWINGS

The normal procedure for submission of record drawings rests primarily with the
contractor. These are edited drawings and specifications submitted by the contractor
that describe actual installed conditions based on the contractor’s field coordination
of the work.
    In some instances, the client may request that the architect revise the original
construction documents or prepare new drawings to reflect the as-built conditions.
This is normally an additional service in the architect-client agreement. It should
be made clear to the client that the architect, if brought into this process, is acting
only in a drafting role, inasmuch as the as-built documentation, including dimen-
sions and details, is furnished by, and is the responsibility of, the contractor.
    As-built and record drawings are helpful to the client in remodeling, mainte-
nance, building-system modification, or making future additions to the project. The
client should retain the drawings with maintenance manuals and operations pro-
cedures.



2.27   FOLLOW-UP INTERVIEWS

It is advisable that the architect or engineer have follow-up interviews with the
client and occupants of the building or tenant spaces to help ascertain the success
of the project and learn where certain materials, details, equipment, or systems may
be improved for future use in other projects. Good client relations demand this type
of exchange. It is also helpful for the architect or engineer to disseminate the
interview results throughout the office and professional community, to improve
problem solving, design, and construction.



2.28   MANAGEMENT OF DISPUTES

Even in the best of relationships, disputes can arise between the client and architect,
client and contractor, or architect and contractor, even though the architect and
contractor do not normally have a written agreement with each other. Disputes
should be quickly addressed and resolved for the well-being of the project and to
                THE BUILDING TEAM—MANAGING THE BUILDING PROCESS                            2.31


minimize disruption of the design and building process. If the dispute cannot be
resolved by the parties, various methods of resolution are offered that include
settlement, mediation, arbitration, and litigation. To maintain insurance coverage
and protect appropriate interests, proper notification to insurers or involvement of
legal counsel is required.

Settlement of Disputes. Disputes between two parties should be addressed quickly
and, if at all possible, a settlement should be rendered and recorded. Settlement
can be in the form of monetary adjustments or payments, free services on behalf
of the architect to remedy or correct an error, or such other agreement between the
two parties. It is recommended that this method of dispute resolution be used when-
ever possible to avoid time, cost, and anguish, which can occur as a result of
mediation, arbitration, and litigation.

Mediation. In mediation, the parties in dispute agree on a third independent party
to act as a mediator and hear each side’s position in the dispute in an attempt to
mediate a resolution. Mediation is not binding on either party but helps resolve
certain disputes due to a third party’s focus on, and question of, the issues.

Arbitration. This is a method of handling disputes in which an arbitrator or ar-
bitration panel, often consisting of three members, is selected to hear the positions
of the parties in the dispute and decide on a potential resolution. The resolution is
binding on the parties. Cost and time for arbitration is usually, but not always, less
than that required for litigation. The arbitrators usually consist of professionals
(architects and engineers), lawyers, contractors, or other parties involved in the
building industry.

Litigation. In the event settlement or mediation cannot resolve a dispute and the
parties do not wish to arbitrate, the only remaining course of action is to litigate
the dispute. This requires that much time and money be expended for depositions,
document and other discovery, and preparation for trial. The final results are ren-
dered by a group of individuals (the jury) or judge not involved in the building
industry. Therefore, a possession of a thorough knowledge and understanding of
issues affecting the architectural and engineering profession and construction in-
dustry become the responsibility of each party’s legal counsel to establish a true
and accurate picture of each party’s position and the facts in the case. See also
Art. 17.14.



2.29    PROFESSIONAL ETHICS

The American Institute of Architects has formulated the following basic principles
for guidance of architects:

       Advice and counsel constitute the service of the profession. Given in verbal, written,
   or graphic form, they are normally rendered in order that buildings with their equipment
   and the areas about them, in addition to being well suited to their purposes, well planned
   for health, safety, and efficient operation and economical maintenance, and soundly
   constructed of materials and by methods most appropriate and economical for their
   particular uses, shall have a beauty and distinction that lift them above the common-
2.32                                   SECTION TWO


   place. It is the purpose of the profession of architecture to render such services from
   the beginning to the completion of a project.

    The fulfillment of that purpose is advanced every time architects render the
highest quality of service they are capable of giving. In particular, the architect’s
drawings, specifications, and other documents should be complete, definite, and
clear concerning the architect’s intentions, the scope of the contractor’s work, the
materials to be employed, and the conditions under which the construction is to be
completed and the work paid for. The relation of architects to their clients depends
on good faith. Architects should explain the exact nature and extent of their services
and the conditional character of construction cost estimates made before final draw-
ings and specifications are complete.
    The contractor depends on the architect to guard the contractor’s interests as
well as those of the client. The architect should reject workmanship and materials
that are determined not to be in conformity with the contract documents, but it is
also the architect’s duty to give reasonable aid toward a complete understanding of
those documents so that errors may be avoided. An exchange of information be-
tween architects and those who supply and handle building materials should be
encouraged.
    Architects, in their investments and business relations outside the profession,
should avoid financial or personal activities that tend to weaken or discredit their
standing as an unprejudiced and honest adviser, free to act in the client’s best
interests. Permitting use of free architectural or engineering services to be offered
by manufacturers; suppliers of building materials, appliances, and equipment; or
contractors may imply an obligation that can become detrimental to the best interest
of the client.
    Architects may offer their services to anyone for commission, salary, or fee as
architect, consultant, adviser, or assistant, provided the architect rigidly maintains
professional integrity, disinterestedness, and freedom to act.
    Architects should work together through their professional organizations to pro-
mote the welfare of the physical environment. They should share in the interchange
of technical information and experience.
    Architects should seek opportunities to be of service in civic affairs. To the best
of their ability, they should endeavor to advance the safety, health, and well-being
of the community in which they reside by promoting appreciation of good design,
good construction, proper placement of facilities, and harmonious development of
the areas surrounding the facility.
    Architects should take action to advance the interests of their personnel, provid-
ing suitable working conditions for them, requiring them to render competent and
efficient services, and paying them adequate and just compensation. Architects
should also encourage and sponsor those who are entering the profession, assisting
them to a full understanding of the functions, duties, and responsibilities of the
architectural profession.
    Every architect should contribute toward justice, courtesy, and sincerity in the
profession. In the conduct of their practice, architects should maintain a totally
professional attitude toward those served, toward those who assist in the practice,
toward fellow architects, and toward the members of other professions. Daily per-
formance should command respect to the extent that the profession will benefit
from the example architects set to other professionals and to the public in general.
                         SECTION THREE
              PROTECTION AGAINST
                   HAZARDS
                                     David W. Mock*
                                       Gee & Jenson
                                  West Palm Beach, Florida




A hazard poses the threat that an unwanted event, possibly a catastrophe, may occur.
Risk is the probability that the event will occur. Inasmuch as all buildings are
subject to hazards such as hurricanes, earthquakes, flood, fire, and lightning strikes,
both during and after construction, building designers and contractors have the
responsibility of estimating the risks of these hazards and the magnitudes of the
consequences should the events be realized.


3.1    RISK MANAGEMENT

After the risk of a hazard has been assessed, the building designers and contractors,
guided by building-code, design standards, zoning-code, and health-agency speci-
fications and exercising their best judgment, should decide on an acceptable level
for the risk. With this done, they should then select a cost-effective way of avoiding
the hazard, if possible, or protecting against it so as to reduce the risk of the hazard’s
occurring to within the acceptable level.
    Studies of building failures provide information that building designers should
use to prevent similar catastrophes. Many of the lessons learned from failures have
led to establishment of safety rules in building codes. These rules, however, gen-
erally are minimum requirements and apply to ordinary structures. Building de-
signers, therefore, should use judgment in applying code requirements and should
adopt more stringent design criteria where conditions dictate.
    Such conditions are especially likely to exist for buildings in extreme climates
or in areas exposed to natural hazards, such as high winds, earthquakes, floods,
landslides, and lightning. Stricter criteria should also be used for buildings that are


   *Revised and updated from Sec. 3, ‘‘Protection Against Hazards’’ by the late Frederick S. Merritt,
Consulting Engineer.

                                                3.1
3.2                                SECTION THREE


tall and narrow, are low but very large, have irregular or unusual shapes, house
hazardous material or critical functions, or are of novel construction. Furthermore,
building codes may not contain provisions for some hazards against which building
designers nevertheless should provide protection. Examples of such hazards are
vandalism, trespass, and burglary. In addition, designers should anticipate conditions
that may exist in buildings in emergencies and provide refuge for occupants or safe
evacuation routes.
    Building designers also should use judgment in determining. the degree of pro-
tection to be provided against specific hazards. Costs of protection should be com-
mensurate with probable losses from an incident. In many cases, for example, it is
uneconomical to construct a building that will be immune to extreme earthquakes,
high winds of tornadoes, arson, bombs, burst dams, or professional burglars. Full
protection, however, should always be provided against hazards with a high prob-
ability of occurrence accompanied by personal injuries or high property losses. Such
hazards include hurricanes and gales, fire, and vandals.
    Structures containing extremely valuable contents or critical equipment justify-
ing design for even the most extreme events may require special hardened rooms
or areas.


3.1.1   Design Life of Buildings

For natural phenomena, design criteria may be based on the probability of occur-
rence of extreme conditions, as determined from statistical studies of events in
specific localities. These probabilities are often expressed as mean recurrence in-
tervals.
   A mean recurrence interval of an extreme condition is the average time, in
years, between occurrences of a condition equal to or worse than the specified
extreme condition. For example, the mean recurrence interval of a wind of 60 mi/
hr or more may be recorded for Los Angeles as 50 years. Thus, after a building
has been erected in Los Angeles, chances are that in the next 50 years it will be
subjected only once to a wind of 60 mi / hr or more. Consequently, if the building
was assumed to have a 50-year life, designers might logically design it basically
for a 60-mi / hr wind, with a safety factor included in the design to protect against
low-probability faster winds. Mean recurrence intervals are the basis for minimum
design loads for high winds, snowfall, and earthquake in many building codes.


3.1.2   Safety Factors

Design of buildings for both normal and emergency conditions should always in-
corporate a safety factor against failure. The magnitude of the safety factor should
be selected in accordance with the importance of a building, the extent of personal
injury or property loss that may result if a failure occurs, and the degree of uncer-
tainty as to the magnitude or nature of loads and the properties and behavior of
building components.
    As usually incorporated in building codes, a safety factor for quantifiable system
variables is a number greater than unity. The factor may be applied in either of two
ways.
    One way is to relate the maximum permissible load, or demand, on a system
under service conditions to design capacity. This system property is calculated by
                            PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                              3.3


dividing by the safety factor the ultimate capacity, or capacity at failure, for sus-
taining that type of load. For example, suppose a structural member assigned a
safety factor of 2 can carry 1000 lb before failure occurs. The service load then is
1000 / 2 ⫽ 500 lb.
    The second way in which codes apply safety factors is to relate the ultimate
capacity of a system, to a design load. This load is calculated by multiplying the
maximum load under service conditions by a safety factor, often referred to as a
load factor. For example, suppose a structural member assigned a load factor of 2
is required to carry a service load of 500 lb. Then, the member should be designed
to have a capacity for sustaining a design load of 500 ⫻ 2 ⫽ 1000 lb, without
failing.
    While both methods achieve the objective of providing reserve capacity against
unexpected conditions, use of load factors offers the advantage of greater flexibility
in design of a system for a combination of different loadings, because a different
load factor can be assigned to each type of loading in accordance with probability
of occurrence and effects of other uncertainties.
    Safety factors for various building systems are discussed in following sections
of the book. This section presents general design principles for protection of build-
ings and occupants against high winds, earthquakes, water, fire, lightning, and in-
truders.



3.2     WIND PROTECTION

For practical design, wind and earthquakes may be treated as horizontal, or lateral,
loads. Although wind and seismic loads may have vertical components, these gen-
erally are small and readily resisted by columns and bearing walls. Vertical earth-
quake components can be important in the design of connections as in precast
concrete structures. Wind often generates significant uplift forces that require spe-
cial attention to vertical restraint and lateral support for members in reverse bending.
    The variation with height of the magnitude of a wind load for a multistory
building differs from that of a seismic load. Nevertheless, provisions for resisting
either type of load are similar.
    In areas where the probability of either a strong earthquake or a high wind is
small, it is nevertheless advisable to provide in buildings considerable resistance to
both types of load. In many cases, such resistance can be incorporated with little
or no increase in costs over designs that ignore either high wind or seismic resis-
tance.


3.2.1   Wind Characteristics

Because wind loads are considered horizontal forces, wind pressure, for design
purposes, should be assumed to be applied to the gross area of the vertical projec-
tion of that portion of the building above the average level of the adjoining ground.
Although the loads are assumed to be horizontal, they may nevertheless apply either
inward pressures or suctions to inclined and horizontal surfaces. In any case, wind
loads should be considered to act normal to the exposed building surfaces. Fur-
thermore, wind should be considered to be likely to come from any direction unless
3.4                               SECTION THREE


it is known for a specific locality that extreme winds may come only from one
direction. As a consequence of this assumption, each wall of a rectangular building
should be considered in design to be subject to the maximum wind load.
    Winds generally strike a building in gusts. Consequently, the building is sub-
jected to dynamic loading. Nevertheless, except for unusually tall or narrow build-
ings, it is common practice to treat wind as a static loading, even though wind
pressures are not constant. High velocity winds can cause considerable vibrations,
particularly in lighter more flexible structures. Therefore, connections that tend to
loosen under heavy vibration should be avoided.
    Estimation of design wind pressures is complicated by several factors. One factor
is the effect of natural and man-made obstructions along the ground. Another factor
is the variation of wind velocity with height above ground. Still another factor
complicating wind-pressure calculation is the effect of building or building com-
ponent shape or geometry (relationship of height or width to length) on pressures.
For important buildings, it is advisable to base design wind pressures on the results
of wind tunnel tests of a model of a building, neighboring buildings, and nearby
terrain.



3.2.2   Wind Pressures and Suctions

Pressures are considered positive when they tend to push a building component
toward the building interior. They are treated as negative for suctions or uplifts,
which tend to pull components outward.
    Figure 3.1a illustrates wind flow over the sloping roof of a low building. For
roofs with inclines up to about 30⬚, the wind may create an uplift over the entire
roof (Fig. 3.1b). Also, as shown in Fig. 3.1b and c, the pressure on the external
face of the windward wall is positive and on the leeward wall, negative (suction).
If there are openings in the walls, the wind will impose internal pressures on the
walls, floors, and roof. The net pressure on any building component, therefore, is
the vector sum of the pressures acting on opposite faces of the component.
    Because of the wind characteristics described in Art. 3.2.1 and the dependence
of wind pressures on building geometry, considerable uncertainty exists as to the
magnitude, direction, and duration of the maximum wind loads that may be imposed
on any portion of a specific building. Consequently, numerous assumptions, based
to some extent on statistical evidence, generally are made to determine design wind
loads for buildings. Minimum requirements for wind loads are presented in local
and model building codes.
    Codes usually permit design wind loads to be determined either by mathematical
calculations in accordance with an analytical procedure specified in the code or by
wind-tunnel tests. Such tests are advisable for structures with unusual shapes, un-
usual response to lateral loading, or location where channeling effects or buffeting
in the wake of upwind obstructions are likely to occur. Tests also are desirable
where wind records are not available or when more accurate information is needed.
Codes often require that the following conditions be met in execution of wind-
tunnel tests:

1. Air motion should be modeled to account for variation of wind speed with
   elevation and the intensity of the longitudinal component of turbulence.
2. The geometric scale of the model should not be greater than 3 times that of the
   longitudinal component of turbulence.
                                PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                                       3.5




FIGURE 3.1 Effects of wind on a low building with pitched roof. (a) Airflow at the building. (b)
Wind applies inward pressure against the windward wall, suction on the leeward wall, and uplift
over all of a roof with slight slopes. (c) With a steep roof, inward pressure acts on the windward
side of the roof and uplift only on the leeward side. (d ) Pressure distribution along walls and roof
assumed for design of wind bracing of a building.


3. Instruments used should have response characteristics consistent with the re-
   quired accuracy of measurements to be recorded.
4. Account should be taken of the dependence of forces and pressures on the
   Reynolds number of the air motion.
5. Tests for determining the dynamic response of a structure should be conducted
   on a model scaled with respect to dimensions, mass distribution, stiffness, and
   damping of the proposed structure.
   In the analytical methods specified by building codes, maximum wind speeds
observed in a region are converted to velocity pressures. These are then multiplied
by various factors, to take into account building, site, and wind characteristics, to
obtain design static wind loads. Bear in mind, however, that, in general, code re-
quirements are applicable to pressures considerably smaller than those created by
tornadoes, which may have wind speeds up to 600 mi / hr. For more information on
wind loads, see Art. 5.1.2.


3.2.3    Failure Modes

Consideration of the ways in which winds may damage or destroy buildings sug-
gests provisions that should be made to prevent failures. Past experience with build-
3.6                                SECTION THREE


ing damage by winds indicates buildings are likely to fail by overturning; sliding;
separation of components; excessive sway, or drift; or structural collapse. Light-
weight and open-sided structures may be subject to failure either partially, or
wholly, due to uplift.
   Subjected to lateral forces W, and uplift U, a building may act as a rigid body
and overturn. It would tend to rotate about the edge of its base on the leeward side
(Fig. 3.2a). Overturning is resisted by the weight of the building M with a lever
arm e measured from the axis of rotation. Building codes usually require that
                                    Me ⱖ 1.5Wh                                    (3.1)
where Wh is the overturning moment.
    Resistance to overturning may be increased by securely anchoring buildings to
foundations. When this is done, the weight of earth atop the footings and pressing
against foundation walls may be included with the weight of the building.
    In addition to the danger of overturning, there is the risk of a building being
pushed laterally by high winds. Sliding is resisted by friction at the base of the
footings and earth pressure against foundation walls (Fig. 3.2b). (Consideration
should be given to the possibility that soil that is highly resistant to building move-
ment when dry may become weak when wet.) Another danger is that a building
may be pushed by wind off the foundations (Fig. 3.2c). Consequently, to prevent
this, a building should be firmly anchored to its foundations.
    Buildings also may be damaged by separation of other components from each
other. Therefore, it is essential that all connections between structural members and
between other components and their supports be capable of resisting design wind
loads. The possibility of separation of components by uplift or suction should not
be overlooked. Such pressures can slide a roof laterally or lift it from its supports,
tear roof coverings, rip off architectural projections, and suck out windows. Failure
of a roof diaphragm or bracing can result in failure of the entire structure.
    Another hazard is drift (sway) or collapse without overturning or sliding. Ex-
cessive drift when the wind rocks a building can cause occupant discomfort, induce
failure of structural components by fatigue, or lead to complete collapse of the
structure. The main resistance to drift usually is provided by structural components,
such as beams, columns, bracing, and walls that are also assigned the task of
supporting gravity loads. Some means must be provided to transmit wind or seismic
loads from these members to the foundations and thence to the ground. Otherwise,
the building may topple like a house of cards (Fig. 3.2d ).




FIGURE 3.2 Some ways in which wind may destroy a building: (a) overturning; (b) sliding
through the ground; (c) sliding off the foundations; (d ) excessive drift (sidesway).
                               PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                                     3.7


   Consideration should also be given to the potential for wind blown debris im-
pacting a structure and damaging critical lateral force resisting elements.


3.2.4   Limitation of Drift

There are no generally accepted criteria for maximum permissible lateral deflections
of buildings. Some building codes limit drift of any story of a building to a max-
imum of 0.25% of the story height for wind and 0.50% of the story height for
earthquake loads. Drift of buildings of unreinforced masonry may be restricted to
half of the preceding values. The severer limitation of drift caused by wind loads
is applied principally because they are likely to occur more frequently than earth-
quakes and will produce motions that will last much longer.
    Three basic methods are commonly used, separately or in combination with each
other, to prevent collapse of buildings under lateral loads, limit drift and transmit
the loads to the foundations. These methods are illustrated in Fig. 3.3. One method
is to incorporate shear walls in a building. A shear wall is a vertical cantilever with
high resistance to horizontal loads parallel to its length (Fig. 3.3a). A pair of per-
pendicular walls can resist wind from any direction, because any wind load can be
resolved into components in the planes of the walls (Fig. 3.3b). Diaphragms de-
veloped from wall, floor, and roof sheating can function similar to solid shear walls
when properly attached and laterally supported.
    A second method of providing resistance to lateral loads is to incorporate di-
agonal structural members to carry lateral forces to the ground (Fig. 3.3c). (The
diagonals in Fig. 3.3c are called X bracing. Other types of bracing are illustrated
in Fig. 3.6.) Under lateral loads, the braced bays of a building act like cantilever
vertical trusses. The arrows in Fig. 3.3c show the paths taken by wind forces from
points of application to the ground. Note that the lateral loads impose downward
axial forces on the leeward columns, causing compression, and uplift on the wind-
ward columns, causing tension.
    A third method of providing resistance to lateral loads is to integrate the beams,
or girders, and columns into rigid frames (Fig. 3.3d ). In a rigid frame, connections
between horizontal and vertical components prevent any change of angle between
the members under loads. (Drift can occur only if beams and columns bend.) Such
joints are often referred to as rigid, moment, or wind connections. They prevent
the frame from collapsing in the manner shown in Fig. 3.2d until the loads are so




FIGURE 3.3 Some ways of restricting drift of a building: (a) shear wall; (b) pair of perpendicular
shear walls; (c) diagonal bracing; (d ) rigid frames.
3.8                                       SECTION THREE


large that the strength of the members and connections is exhausted. Note that in
a rigid frame, leeward columns are subjected to bending and axial compression and
windward columns are subjected to bending and axial tension.
    In addition to using one or more of the preceding methods, designers can reduce
drift by proper shaping of buildings, arrangements of structural components, and
selection of members with adequate dimensions and geometry to withstand changes
in dimensions. Shape is important because low, squat buildings have less sidesway
than tall, narrow buildings, and buildings with circular or square floor plans have
less sidesway than narrow rectangular buildings with the same floor area per story.

Low Buildings. Figure 3.4a illustrates the application of diagonal bracing to a
low, industrial-type building. Bracing in the plane of the roof acts with the rafters,
ridge beam, and an edge roof beam as an inclined truss, which resists wind pres-
sures on the roof. Each truss transmits the wind load to the ends of the building.
Diagonals in the end walls transmit the load to the foundations. Wind pressure on
the end walls is resisted by diagonal bracing in the end panels of the longitudinal
walls. Wind pressure on the longitudinal walls, like wind on the roof, is transmitted
to the end walls.
   For large buildings, rigid frames are both structurally efficient and economic.
   Alternatively, for multistory buildings, shear walls may be used. Figure 3.4b
shows shear walls arranged in the shape of a T in plan, to resist wind from any
direction. Figure 3.4c illustrates the use of walls enclosing stairwells and elevator
shafts as shear walls. In apartment buildings, closet enclosures also can serve as
shear walls if designed for the purpose. Figure 3.4d shows shear walls placed at
the ends of a building to resist wind on its longitudinal walls. Wind on the shear
walls, in turn, is resisted by girders and columns in the longitudinal direction acting
as rigid frames. (See also Art. 5.12.)

Tall Buildings. For low buildings, structural members sized for gravity loads may
require little or no enlargement to also carry stresses due to lateral loads. For tall
buildings, however, structural members often have to be larger than sizes necessary
only for gravity loads. With increase in height, structural material requirements
increase rapidly. Therefore, for tall buildings, designers should select wind-bracing
systems with high structural efficiency to keep material requirements to a minimum.




FIGURE 3.4 Bracing of low buildings: (a) diagonal bracing in roofs and walls; (b) isolated pairs
of shear walls in a T pattern; (c) service-core enclosure used as shear walls; (d ) shear walls at ends
of building and rigid frames in the perpendicular direction.
                                PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                                         3.9


    While shear walls, diagonal bracing, and rigid frames can be used even for very
tall buildings, simple framing arrangements, such as planar systems, are not so
efficient in high structures as more sophisticated framing. For example, shear walls
or rigid frames in planes parallel to the lateral forces (Fig. 3.5a) may sway consid-
erably at the top if the building is tall (more than 30 stories) and slender. Resistance
to drift may be improved, however, if the shear walls are arranged in the form of
a tube within the building (Fig. 3.5b). (The space within the tube can be utilized
for stairs, elevators, and other services. This space is often referred to as the service
core.) The cantilevered tube is much more efficient in resisting lateral forces than
a series of planar, parallel shear walls containing the same amount of material.
Similarly, rigid frames and diagonal bracing may be arranged in the form of an
internal tube to improve resistance to lateral forces.
    The larger the size of the cantilevered tube for a given height, the greater will
be its resistance to drift. For maximum efficiency of a simple tube, it can be ar-
ranged to enclose the entire building (Fig. 3.5c) For the purpose, bracing or a rigid
frame may be erected behind or in the exterior wall, or the exterior wall itself may
be designed to act as a perforated tube. Floors act as horizontal diaphragms to brace
the tube and distribute the lateral forces to it.
    For very tall buildings, when greater strength and drift resistance are needed
than can be provided by a simple tube, the tube around the exterior may be aug-
mented by an internal tube (Fig. 3.5d ) or by other arrangements of interior bracing,
such as shear walls attached and perpendicular to the exterior tube. As an alter-
native, a very tall building may be composed of several interconnected small tubes,
which act together in resisting lateral forces (Fig. 3.5e). Known as bundled tubes,
this type of framing offers greater flexibility in floor-area reduction at various levels
than a tube-within-tube type, because the tubes in a bundle can differ in height.
    Diagonal bracing is more efficient in resisting drift than the other methods,
because the structural members carry the loads to the foundations as axial forces,
as shown in Fig. 3.3c, rather than as a combination of bending, shear, and axial




  FIGURE 3.5 Bracing of tall buildings: (a) diagonal bracing, rigid frames, or shear walls
  placed in planes (bents) parallel to the lateral forces; (b) interior tube enclosing service core;
  (c) perforated tube enclosing the building; (d ) tube within a tube; (e) bundled tubes.
3.10                                       SECTION THREE


forces. Generally, the bracing is arranged to form trusses composed of triangular
configurations, because of the stability of such arrangements. The joints between
members comprising a triangle cannot move relative to each other unless the length
of the members changes. Figure 3.6a illustrates the use of X bracing in the center
bay of a multistory building to form a vertical cantilever truss to resist lateral forces.
    Other forms of bracing, however, may be used as an alternative to reduce ma-
terial requirements or to provide more space for wall penetrations, such as doors
and windows. Figure 3.6b shows how a single diagonal can be used in the center
bay to form a vertical truss. In large bays, however, the length of the diagonal may
become too long for structural efficiency. Hence, two or more diagonals may be
inserted in the bay instead, as shown in Fig. 3.6c to e. The type of bracing in Fig.
3.6c is known as K bracing; that in Fig. 3.6d, as V bracing; and that in Fig. 3.6e,
as inverted V bracing. The V type, however, has the disadvantage of restricting
deflection of the beams to which the diagonals are attached and thus compelling
the diagonals to carry gravity loads applied to the beams.
    The bracing shown in Fig. 3.6a to e has the disadvantage of obstructing the bay
and interfering with placement of walls, doors, passageways, and, for bracing along
the building exterior, placement of windows. Accordingly, the inverted V type often
is converted to knee bracing, short diagonals placed near beam-to-column joints.
When knee bracing also is architecturally objectionable because of interference with
room arrangements, an alternative form of wind bracing, such as rigid frames or
shear walls, has to be adopted.
    Trusses also can be placed horizontally to stiffen buildings for less drift. For
example, Fig. 3.6ƒ shows a building with wind bracing provided basically by an
internal vertical cantilever tube. A set of horizontal trusses at the roof and a similar
set at an intermediate level tie the tube to the exterior columns. The trusses reduce
the drift at the top of the building by utilizing bending resistance of the columns.
A belt of horizontal trusses around the building exterior at the roof and the inter-
mediate level also helps resist drift of the building by utilizing bending resistance
of the exterior columns.
    When not considered architecturally objectionable, diagonal bracing may be
placed on the building exterior to form a braced tube. The bracing may also serve




       FIGURE 3.6 Some types of diagonal bracing: (a) X bracing in an interior bent; (b)
       single diagonal; (c) K bracing; (d ) V bracing; (e) inverted V bracing; (ƒ) horizontal
       trusses at the roof and intermediate levels to restrict drift; (g) X bracing on the exterior
       of a building.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                            3.11


as columns to transmit floor and roof loads to the ground. Figure 3.6g shows how
multistory X bracing has been used to create a braced tube for a skyscraper.
   See also Arts. 3.3.5, 5.18–19, and Secs. 7 through 10.
   (Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat, ‘‘Planning and Design of Tall
Buildings,’’ Vols. SC, SB, and CB, American Society of Civil Engineers, New York;
E. Simiu and R. H. Scanlon, ‘‘Wind Effects on Structures,’’ John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., New York; Minimum Design Loads for Tall Buildings and Other Structures
ANSI / ASCE 7-98, American Society of Civil Engineers, New York.)



3.3     PROTECTION AGAINST EARTHQUAKES

Buildings should be designed to withstand minor earthquakes without damage, be-
cause they may occur almost everywhere. For major earthquakes, it may not be
economical to prevent all damage but collapse should be precluded.
   Because an earthquake and a high wind are not likely to occur simultaneously,
building codes usually do not require that buildings be designed for a combination
of large seismic and wind loads. Thus, designers may assume that the full strength
of wind bracing is also available to resist drift caused by earthquakes.
   The methods of protecting against high winds described in Art. 3.2.4 may also
be used for protecting against earthquakes. Shaking of buildings produced by tem-
blors, however, is likely to be much severer than that caused by winds. Conse-
quently, additional precautions must be taken to protect against earthquakes. Be-
cause such protective measures will also be useful in resisting unexpectedly high
winds, such as those from tornadoes, however, it is advisable to apply aseismic
design principles to all buildings.
   These principles require that collapse be avoided, oscillations of buildings
damped, and damage to both structural and nonstructural components minimized.
Nonstructural components are especially liable to damage from large drift. For
example, walls are likely to be stiffer than structural framing and therefore subject
to greater seismic forces. The walls, as a result, may crack or collapse. Also, they
may interfere with planned actions of structural components and cause additional
damage. Consequently, aseismic design of buildings should make allowance for
large drift, for example, by providing gaps between adjoining buildings and between
adjoining building components not required to be rigidly connected together and
by permitting sliding of such components. Thus, partitions and windows should be
free to move in their frames so that no damage will occur when an earthquake
wracks the frames. Heavy elements in buildings, such as water tanks, should be
firmly anchored to prevent them from damaging critical structural components.
Displacement of gas hot water heaters is a common cause of gas fires following
earthquakes.



3.3.1   Earthquake Characteristics

Earthquakes are produced by sudden release of tremendous amounts of energy
within the earth by a sudden movement at a point called the hypocenter. (The point
on the surface of the earth directly above the hypocenter is called the epicenter.)
The resulting shock sends out longitudinal, vertical, and transverse vibrations in all
3.12                               SECTION THREE


directions, both through the earth’s crust and along the surface, and at different
velocities. Consequently, the shock waves arrive at distant points at different times.
    As a result, the first sign of the advent of an earthquake at a distant point is
likely to be faint surface vibration of short duration as the first longitudinal waves
arrive at the point. Then, severe shocks of longer duration occur there, as other
waves arrive.
    Movement at any point of the earth’s surface during a temblor may be recorded
with seismographs and plotted as seismograms, which show the variation with time
of displacements. Seismograms of past earthquakes indicate that seismic wave
forms are very complex.
    Ground accelerations are also very important, because they are related to the
inertial forces that act on building components during an earthquake. Accelerations
are recorded in accelerograms, which are a plot of the variation with time of com-
ponents of the ground accelerations. Newton’s law relates acceleration to force:
                                              W
                                  F ⫽ Ma ⫽      a                                (3.2)
                                              g
where F   ⫽   force, lb
     M    ⫽   mass accelerated
      a   ⫽   acceleration of the mass, ft / s2
     W    ⫽   weight of building component accelerated, lb
      g   ⫽   acceleration due to gravity ⫽ 32.2 ft / s2


3.3.2   Seismic Scales

For study of the behavior of buildings in past earthquakes and application of the
information collected to contemporary aseismic design, it is useful to have some
quantitative means for comparing earthquake severity. Two scales, the Modified
Mercalli and the Richter, are commonly used in the United States.
   The Modified Mercalli scale compares earthquake intensity by assigning values
to human perceptions of the severity of oscillations and extent of damage to build-
ings. The scale has 12 divisions. The severer the reported oscillations and damage,
the higher is the number assigned to the earthquake intensity (Table 3.1).
   The Richter scale assigns numbers M to earthquake intensity in accordance with
the amount of energy released, as measured by the maximum amplitude of ground
motion:
                                                     100
                            M ⫽ log A ⫺ 1.73 log                                 (3.3)
                                                      D
where M ⫽ earthquake magnitude 100 km from epicenter
      A ⫽ maximum amplitude of ground motion, micrometers
      D ⫽ distance, km, from epicenter to point where A is measured
The larger the ground displacement at a given location, the higher the value of the
number assigned on the Richter scale. A Richter magnitude of 8 corresponds ap-
proximately to a Modified Mercalli intensity of XI, and for smaller intensities,
Richter scale digits are about one unit less than corresponding Mercalli Roman
numerals.
                            PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                                  3.13


TABLE 3.1 Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale (Abridged)

Intensity                                       Definition
     I         Detected only by sensitive instruments.
    II         Felt by a few persons at rest, especially on upper floors. Delicate suspended
               objects may swing.
    III        Felt noticeably indoors; not always recognized as an earthquake. Standing
               automobiles rock slightly. Vibration similar to that caused by a passing
               truck.
   IV          Felt indoors by many, outdoors by few; at night some awaken. Windows,
               dishes, doors rattle. Standing automobiles rock noticeably.
    V          Felt by nearly everyone. Some breakage of plaster, windows, and dishes.
               Tall objects disturbed.
   VI          Felt by all; many frightened and run outdoors. Falling plaster and damaged
               chimneys.
   VII         Everyone runs outdoors. Damage of buildings negligible to slight, depending
               on quality of construction. Noticeable to drivers of automobiles.
  VIII         Damage slight to considerable in substantial buildings, great in poorly
               constructed structures. Walls thrown out of frames; walls, chimneys,
               monuments fall; sand and mud ejected.
   IX          Considerable damage to well-designed structures; structures shifted off
               foundations; buildings thrown out of plumb; underground pipes damaged.
               Ground cracked conspicuously.
    X          Many masonry and frame structures destroyed; rails bent; water splashed
               over banks; landslides; ground cracked.
   XI          Bridges destroyed; rails bent greatly; most masonry structures destroyed;
               underground service pipes out of commission; landslides; broad fissures in
               ground.
   XII         Total damage. Waves seen in surface level; lines of sight and level distorted;
               objects thrown into air.



3.3.3     Effects of Ground Conditions

The amplitude of ground motion at a specific location during an earthquake depends
not only on distance from the epicenter but also on the types of soil at the location.
(Some soils suffer a loss of strength in an earthquake and allow large, uneven
foundation settlements, which cause severe property damage.) Ground motion usu-
ally is much larger in alluvial soils (sands or clays deposited by flowing water) than
in rocky areas or diluvial soils (material deposited by glaciers). Reclaimed land or
earth fills generally undergo even greater displacements than alluvial soils. Con-
sequently, in selection of sites for structures in zones where severe earthquakes are
highly probable during the life of the structures, preference should be given to sites
with hard ground or rock to considerable depth, with sand and gravel as a less
desirable alternative and clay as a poor choice.


3.3.4     Seismic Forces

During an earthquake, the ground may move horizontally in any direction and up
and down, shifting the building foundations correspondingly. Inertial forces, or seis-
3.14                               SECTION THREE


mic loads, on the building resist the displacements. Major damage usually is caused
by the horizontal components of these loads, inasmuch as vertical structural mem-
bers and connections generally have adequate strength to resist the vertical com-
ponents. Hence, as for wind loads, buildings should be designed to resist the max-
imum probable horizontal component applied in any direction. Vertical components
of force must be considered in design of connections in high mass prefabricated
elements such as precast concrete slabs and girders.
    Seismic forces vary rapidly with time. Therefore, they impose a dynamic loading
on buildings. Calculation of the building responses to such loading is complex (Art.
5.18.6) and is usually carried out only for important buildings that are very tall and
slender. For other types of buildings, building codes generally permit use of an
alternative static loading for which structural analysis is much simpler (Art. 5.19).


3.3.5   Aseismic Design

The basic methods for providing wind resistance—shear walls, diagonal bracing,
and rigid frames (Art. 3.2.4) are also suitable for resisting seismic loads. Ductile
rigid frames, however, are preferred because of large energy-absorbing capacity.
Building codes encourage their use by permitting them to be designed for smaller
seismic loads than those required for shear walls and diagonal bracing. (Ductility
is a property that enables a structural member to undergo considerable deformation
without failing. The more a member deforms, the more energy it can absorb and
therefore the greater is the resistance it can offer to dynamic loads.)
    For tall, slender buildings, use of the basic methods alone in limiting drift to an
acceptable level may not be cost-effective. In such cases, improved response to the
dynamic loads may be improved by installation of heavy masses near the roof, with
their movements restricted by damping devices. Another alternative is installation
of energy-absorbing devices at key points in the structural framing, such as at the
bearings of bottom columns or the intersections of cross bracing.
    Designers usually utilize floors and roofs, acting as horizontal diaphragms, to
transmit lateral forces to the resisting structural members. Horizontal bracing, how-
ever, may be used instead. Where openings occur in floors and roofs, for example
for floors and elevators, structural framing should be provided around the openings
to bypass the lateral forces.
    As for wind loads, the weight of the building and of earth adjoining foundations
are the only forces available to prevent the horizontal loads from overturning the
building. [See Eq. (3.1) in Art. 3.2.3.] Also, as for wind loads, the roof should be
firmly anchored to the superstructure framing, which, in turn, should be securely
attached to the foundations. Furthermore, individual footings, especially pile and
caisson footings, should be tied to each other to prevent relative movement.
    Building codes often limit the drift per story under the equivalent static seismic
load (see Art. 5.19.3). Connections and intersections of curtain walls and partitions
with each other or with the structural framing should allow for a relative movement
of at least twice the calculated drift in each story. Such allowances for displacement
may be larger than those normally required for dimensional changes caused by
temperature variations.
    See also Art. 5.19.
    (N. M. Newmark and E. Rosenblueth, ‘‘Fundamentals of Earthquake Engineer-
ing,’’ and J. S. Stratta, ‘‘Manual of Seismic Design,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.; ‘‘Standard Building Code,’’ Southern Building Code Congress Inter-
national, Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, AL 35213-1206; ‘‘Uniform Build-
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                            3.15


ing Code,’’ International Conference of Building Officials, Inc., 5360 South Work-
man Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601.)



3.4     PROTECTION AGAINST WATER

Whether thrust against and into a building by a flood, driven into the interior by a
heavy rain, leaking from plumbing, storm surge, or seeping through the exterior
enclosure, water can cause costly damage to a building. Consequently, designers
should protect buildings and their contents against water damage.
   Protective measures may be divided into two classes: floodproofing and water-
proofing. Floodproofing provides protection against flowing surface water, com-
monly caused by a river overflowing its banks. Waterproofing provides protection
against penetration through the exterior enclosure of buildings of groundwater, rain-
water, and melting snow. Buildings adjacent to large water bodies may also require
protection from undermining due to erosion and impact from storm driven waves.


3.4.1   Floodproofing

A flood occurs when a river rises above an elevation, called flood stage, and is not
prevented by enclosures from causing damage beyond its banks. Buildings con-
structed in a flood plain, an area that can be inundated by a flood, should be
protected against a flood with a mean recurrence interval of 100 years. Maps
showing flood-hazard areas in the United States can be obtained from the Federal
Insurance Administrator, Department of Housing and Urban Development, who
administers the National Flood Insurance Program. Minimum criteria for flood-
proofing are given in National Flood Insurance Rules and Regulations (Federal
Register, vol. 41, no. 207, Oct. 26, 1976).
    Major objectives of floodproofing are to protect fully building and contents from
damage from a l00-year flood, reduce losses from more devastating floods, and
lower flood insurance premiums. Floodproofing, however, would be unnecessary if
buildings were not constructed in flood prone areas. Building in flood prone areas
should be avoided unless the risk to life is acceptable and construction there can
be economically and socially justified.
    Some sites in flood prone areas possess some ground high enough to avoid flood
damage. If such sites must be used, buildings should be clustered on the high areas.
Where such areas are not available, it may be feasible to build up an earth fill, with
embankments protected against erosion by water, to raise structures above flood
levels. Preferably, such structures should not have basements, because they would
require costly protection against water pressure.
    An alternative to elevating a building on fill is raising it on stilts (columns in
an unenclosed space). In that case, utilities and other services should be protected
against damage from flood flows. The space at ground level between the stilts may
be used for parking automobiles, if the risk of water damage to them is acceptable
or if they will be removed before flood waters reach the site.
    Buildings that cannot be elevated above flood stage should be furnished with an
impervious exterior. Windows should be above flood stage, and doors should seal
tightly against their frames. Doors and other openings may also be protected with
a flood shield, such as a wall. Openings in the wall for access to the building may
3.16                                       SECTION THREE


be protected with a movable flood shield, which for normal conditions can be stored
out of sight and then positioned in the wall opening when a flood is imminent.
   To prevent water damage to essential services for buildings in flood plains,
important mechanical and electrical equipment should be located above flood level.
Also, auxiliary electric generators to provide some emergency power are desirable.
In addition, pumps should be installed to eject water that leaks into the building.
Furthermore, unless a building is to be evacuated in case of flood, an emergency
water supply should be stored in a tank above flood level, and sewerage should be
provided with cutoff valves to prevent backflow.


3.4.2    Waterproofing*

In addition to protecting buildings against floods, designers also should adopt mea-
sures that prevent groundwater, rainwater, snow, or melted snow from penetrating
into the interior through the exterior enclosure. Water may leak through cracks,
expansion joints or other openings in walls and roofs, or through cracks around
windows and doors. Also, water may seep through solid but porous exterior ma-
terials, such as masonry. Leakage generally may be prevented by use of weather-
stripping around windows and doors, impervious waterstops in joints, or calking of
cracks and other openings. Methods of preventing seepage, however, depend on the
types of materials used in the exterior enclosure.

Definitions of Terms Related to Water Resistance
Permeability. Quality or state of permitting passage of water and water vapor
  into, through, and from pores and interstices, without causing rupture or dis-
  placement.
Terms used in this section to describe the permeability of materials, coatings, struc-
  tural elements, and structures follow in decreasing order of permeability:
Pervious or Leaky. Cracks, crevices, leaks, or holes larger than capillary pores,
  which permit a flow or leakage of water, are present. The material may or may
  not contain capillary pores.
Water-resistant. Capillary pores exist that permit passage of water and water
  vapor, but there are few or no openings larger than capillaries that permit leakage
  of significant amounts of water.
Water-repellent. Not ‘‘wetted’’ by water; hence, not capable of transmitting water
  by capillary forces alone. However, the material may allow transmission of water
  under pressure and may be permeable to water vapor.
Waterproof. No openings are present that permit leakage or passage of water and
  water vapor; the material is impervious to water and water vapor, whether under
  pressure or not.
   These terms also describe the permeability of a surface coating or a treatment
against water penetration, and they refer to the permeability of materials, structural
members, and structures whether or not they have been coated or treated.


    *Excerpted with minor revisions from Sec. 12 of the third edition of this handbook, authored by Cyrus
C. Fishburn, formerly with the Division of Building Technology, National Bureau of Standards.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                           3.17


Permeability of Concrete and Masonry. Concrete contains many interconnected
voids and openings of various sizes and shapes, most of which are of capillary
dimensions. If the larger voids and openings are few in number and not directly
connected with each other, there will be little or no water penetration by leakage
and the concrete may be said to be water-resistant.
   Concrete in contact with water not under pressure ordinarily will absorb it. The
water is drawn into the concrete by the surface tension of the liquid in the wetted
capillaries.
   Water-resistant concrete for buildings should be a properly cured, dense, rich
concrete containing durable, well-graded aggregate. The water content of the con-
crete mix should be as low as is compatible with workability and ease of placing
and handling. Resistance of concrete to penetration of water may be improved,
however, by incorporation of a water-repellent admixture in the mix during man-
ufacture. (See also Art. 9.9.)
   Water-repellent concrete is permeable to water vapor. If a vapor-pressure gra-
dient is present, moisture may penetrate from the exposed face to an inner face.
The concrete is not made waterproof (in the full meaning of the term) by the use
of an integral water repellent. Note also that water repellents may not make concrete
impermeable to penetration of water under pressure. They may, however, reduce
absorption of water by the concrete.
   Most masonry units also will absorb water. Some are highly pervious under
pressure. The mortar commonly used in masonry will absorb water too but usually
contains few openings permitting leakage.
   Masonry walls may leak at the joints between the mortar and the units, however.
Except in single-leaf walls of highly pervious units, leakage at the joints results
from failure to fill them with mortar and poor bond between the masonry unit and
mortar. As with concrete, rate of capillary penetration through masonry walls is
small compared with the possible rate of leakage.
   Capillary penetration of moisture through above-grade walls that resist leakage
of wind-driven rain is usually of minor importance. Such penetration of moisture
into well-ventilated subgrade structures may also be of minor importance if the
moisture is readily evaporated. However, long-continued capillary penetration into
some deep, confined subgrade interiors frequently results in an increase in relative
humidity, a decrease in evaporation rate, and objectionable dampness.


3.4.3   Roof Drainage

Many roof failures have been caused by excessive water accumulation. In most
cases, the overload that caused failure was not anticipated in design of those roofs,
because the designers expected rainwater to run off the roof. But because of in-
adequate drainage, the water ponded instead.
     On flat roofs, ponding of rainwater causes structural members to deflect. The
resulting bowing of the roof surface permits more rainwater to accumulate, and the
additional weight of this water causes additional bowing and collection of even
more water. This process can lead to roof collapse. Similar conditions also can
occur in the valleys of sloping roofs.
     To avoid water accumulation, roofs should be sloped toward drains and pipes
that have adequate capacity to conduct water away from the roofs, in accordance
with local plumbing codes. Minimum roof slope for drainage should be at least 1⁄4
in / ft, but larger slopes are advisable.
3.18                                SECTION THREE


   The primary drainage system should be supplemented by a secondary drainage
system at a higher level to prevent ponding on the roof above that level. The
overflow drains should be at least as large as the primary drains and should be
connected to drain pipes independent of the primary system or scuppers through
the parapets. The roof and its structural members should be capable of sustaining
the weight of all rainwater that could accumulate on the roof if part or all of the
primary drainage system should become blocked.


3.4.4   Drainage for Subgrade Structures

Subgrade structures located above groundwater level in drained soil may be in
contact with water and wet soil for periods of indefinite duration after long-
continued rains and spring thaws. Drainage of surface and subsurface water, how-
ever, may greatly reduce the time during which the walls and floor of a structure
are subjected to water, may prevent leakage through openings resulting from poor
workmanship and reduce the capillary penetration of water into the structure. If
subsurface water cannot be removed by drainage, the structure must be made
waterproof or highly water-resistant.
   Surface water may be diverted by grading the ground surface away from the
walls and by carrying the runoff from roofs away from the building. The slope of
the ground surface should be at least 1⁄4 in / ft for a minimum distance of 10 ft from
the walls. Runoff from high ground adjacent to the structure should also be diverted.
                                                   Proper subsurface drainage of ground
                                              water away from basement walls and
                                              floors requires a drain of adequate size,
                                              sloped continuously, and, where neces-
                                              sary, carried around corners of the build-
                                              ing without breaking continuity. The
                                              drain should lead to a storm sewer or to
                                              a lower elevation that will not be
                                              flooded and permit water to back up in
                                              the drain.
                                                   Drain tile should have a minimum di-
                                              ameter of 6 in and should be laid in
                                              gravel or other kind of porous bed at
                                              least 6 in below the basement floor. The
FIGURE 3.7 Drainage at the bottom of a open joints between the tile should be
foundation wall.                              covered with a wire screen or building
                                              paper to prevent clogging of the drain
with fine material. Gravel should be laid above the tile, filling the excavation to an
elevation well above the top of the footing. Where considerable water may be
expected in heavy soil, the gravel fill should be carried up nearly to the ground
surface and should extend from the wall a distance of at least 12 in (Fig. 3.7).


3.4.5   Concrete Floors at Grade

Floors on ground should preferably not be constructed in low-lying areas that are
wet from ground water or periodically flooded with surface water. The ground
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                            3.19


should slope away from the floor. The level of the finished floor should be at least
6 in above grade. Further protection against ground moisture and possible flooding
of the slab from heavy surface runoffs may be obtained with subsurface drains
located at the elevation of the wall footings.
    All organic material and topsoil of poor bearing value should be removed in
preparation of the subgrade, which should have a uniform bearing value to prevent
unequal settlement of the floor slab. Backfill should be tamped and compacted in
layers not exceeding 6 in in depth.
    Where the subgrade is well-drained, as where subsurface drains are used or are
unnecessary, floor slabs of residences should be insulated either by placing a gran-
ular fill over the subgrade or by use of a lightweight-aggregate concrete slab covered
with a wearing surface of gravel or stone concrete. The granular fill, if used, should
have a minimum thickness of 5 in and may consist of coarse slag, gravel, or crushed
stone, preferably of 1-in minimum size. A layer of 3-, 4-, or 6-in-thick hollow
masonry building units is preferred to gravel fill for insulation and provides a
smooth, level bearing surface.
    Moisture from the ground may be absorbed by the floor slab. Floor coverings,
such as oil-base paints, linoleum, and asphalt tile, acting as a vapor barrier over
the slab, may be damaged as a result. If such floor coverings are used and where
a complete barrier against the rise of moisture from the ground is desired, a two-
ply bituminous membrane or other waterproofing material should be placed beneath
the slab and over the insulating concrete or granular fill (Fig. 3.8). The top of the
lightweight-aggregate concrete, if used, should be troweled or brushed to a smooth
level surface for the membrane. The top of the granular fill should be covered with
a grout coating, similarly finished. (The grout coat, 1⁄2 to 1 in thick, may consist
of a 1:3 or a 1:4 mix by volume of portland cement and sand. Some 3⁄8- or 1⁄2-in
maximum-sized coarse aggregate may be added to the grout if desired.) After the
top surface of the insulating concrete or grout coating has hardened and dried, it
should be mopped with hot asphalt or coal-tar pitch and covered before cooling
with a lapped layer of 15-lb bituminous saturated felt. The first ply of felt then
should be mopped with hot bitumen and a second ply of felt laid and mopped on
its top surface. Care should be exercised not to puncture the membrane, which




FIGURE 3.8 Insulated concrete slab on ground with membrane dampproofing.
3.20                                SECTION THREE


should preferably be covered with a coating of mortar, immediately after its com-
pletion. If properly laid and protected from damage, the membrane may be consid-
ered to be a waterproof barrier.
    Where there is no possible danger of water reaching the underside of the floor,
a single layer of 55-lb smooth-surface asphalt roll roofing or an equivalent water-
proofing membrane may be used under the floor. Joints between the sheets should
be lapped and sealed with bituminous mastic. Great care should be taken to prevent
puncturing of the roofing layer during concreting operations. When so installed,
asphalt roll roofing provides a low-cost and adequate barrier against the movement
of excessive amounts of moisture by capillarity and in the form of vapor. In areas
with year-round warm climates, insulation can be omitted.
    (‘‘A Guide to the Use of Waterproofing, Dampproofing, Protective and Deco-
rative Barrier Systems for Concrete,’’ ACI 515.1R, American Concrete Institute.)


3.4.6   Basement Floors

Where a basement is to be used in drained soils as living quarters or for the storage
of things that may be damaged by moisture, the floor should be insulated and should
preferably contain the membrane waterproofing described in Art. 3.4.5 In general
the design and construction of such basement floors are similar to those of floors
on ground.
    If passage of moisture from the ground into the basement is unimportant or can
be satisfactorily controlled by air conditioning or ventilation, the waterproof
membrane need not be used. The concrete slab should have a minimum thickness
of 4 in and need not be reinforced, but should be laid on a granular fill or other
insulation placed on a carefully prepared subgrade. The concrete in the slab should
have a minimum compressive strength of 2000 psi and may contain an integral
water repellent.
    A basement floor below the water table will be subjected to hydrostatic upward
pressures. The floor should be made heavy enough to counteract the uplift.
    An appropriate sealant in the joint between the basement walls and a floor over
drained soil will prevent leakage into the basement of any water that may occa-
sionally accumulate under the slab. Space for the joint may be provided by use of
beveled siding strips, which are removed after the concrete has hardened. After the
slab is properly cured, it and the wall surface should be in as dry a condition as is
practicable before the joint is filled to ensure a good bond of the filler and to reduce
the effects of slab shrinkage on the permeability of the joint.
    (‘‘Guide to Joint Sealants for Concrete Structures,’’ ACI 504R, American Con-
crete Institute.)


3.4.7   Monolithic Concrete Basement Walls

These should have a minimum thickness of 6 in. Where insulation is desirable, as
where the basement is used for living quarters, lightweight aggregate, such as those
prepared by calcining or sintering blast-furnace slag, clay, or shale that meet the
requirements of ASTM Standard C330 may be used in the concrete. The concrete
should have a minimum compressive strength of 2000 psi.
   For the forms in which concrete for basement walls is cast, form ties of an
internal-disconnecting type are preferable to twisted-wire ties. Entrance holes for
the form ties should be sealed with mortar after the forms are removed. If twisted-
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                            3.21


wire ties are used, they should be cut a minimum distance of 11⁄2 in inside the face
of the wall and the holes filled with mortar.
   The resistance of the wall to capillary penetration of water in temporary contact
with the wall face may be increased by the use of a water-repellent admixture. The
water repellent may also be used in the concrete at and just above grade to reduce
the capillary rise of moisture from the ground into the superstructure wails.
   Where it is desirable to make the wall resistant to passage of water vapor from
the outside and to increase its resistance to capillary penetration of water, the
exterior wall face may be treated with an impervious coating. The continuity and
the resultant effectiveness in resisting moisture penetration of such a coating is
dependent on the smoothness and regularity of the concrete surface and on the skill
and technique used in applying the coating to the dry concrete surface. Some
bituminous coatings that may be used are listed below in increasing order of their
resistance to moisture penetration:
   Spray- or brush-applied asphalt emulsions
   Spray- or brush-applied bituminous cutbacks
   Trowel coatings of bitumen with organic solvent, applied cold
   Hot-applied asphalt or coal-tar pitch, preceded by application of a suitable primer
    Cementitious brush-applied paints and grouts and trowel coatings of a mortar
increase moisture resistance of monolithic concrete, especially if such coatings con-
tain a water repellent. However, in properly drained soil, such coatings may not be
justified unless needed to prevent leakage of water through openings in the concrete
resulting from segregation of the aggregate and bad workmanship in casting the
walls. The trowel coatings may also be used to level irregular wall surfaces in
preparation for the application of a bituminous coating. For information on other
waterproofing materials, see ‘‘A Guide to the Use of Waterproofing, Dampproofing,
Protective and Decorative Barrier Systems for Concrete,’’ ACI 515.1R, American
Concrete Institute.


3.4.8   Unit-Masonry Basement Walls

Water-resistant basement walls of masonry units should be carefully constructed of
durable materials to prevent leakage and damage due to frost and other weathering
exposure. Frost action is most severe at the grade line and may result in structural
damage and leakage of water. Where wetting followed by sudden severe freezing
may occur, the masonry units should meet the requirements of the following spec-
ifications:
   Building brick (solid masonry units made from clay or shale), ASTM Standard
   C62, Grade SW
   Facing brick (solid masonry units made from clay or shale), ASTM Standard
   C216, Grade SW
   Structural clay load-bearing wall tile, ASTM Standard C34, Grade LBX
   Hollow load-bearing concrete masonry units, ASTM Standard C90, Grade N
   For such exposure conditions, the mortar should be a Type S mortar (Table 4.4)
having a minimum compressive strength of 1800 psi when tested in accordance
with the requirements of ASTM Standard C270. For milder freezing exposures and
3.22                              SECTION THREE


where the walls may be subjected to some lateral pressure from the earth, the mortar
should have a minimum compressive strength of 1000 psi.
   Leakage through an expansion joint in a concrete or masonry foundation wall
may be prevented by insertion of a waterstop in the joint. Waterstops should be of
the bellows type, made of l6-oz copper sheet, which should extend a minimum
distance of 6 in on either side of the joint. The sheet should be embedded between
wythes of masonry units or faced with a 2-in-thick cover of mortar reinforced with
welded-wire fabric. The outside face of the expansion joint should be filled flush
with the wall face with a joint sealant, as recommended in ACI 504R.
   Rise of moisture, by capillarity, from the ground into the superstructure walls
may be greatly retarded by use of an integral water-repellent admixture in the
mortar. The water-repellent mortar may be used in several courses of masonry
located at and just above grade.
   The use of shotcrete or trowel-applied mortar coatings, 3⁄4 in or more in thick-
ness, to the outside faces of both monolithic concrete and unit-masonry walls
greatly increases their resistance to penetration of moisture. Such plaster coatings
cover and seal construction joints and other vulnerable joints in the walls against
leakage. When applied in a thickness of 2 in or more, they may be reinforced with
welded-wire fabric to reduce the incidence of large shrinkage cracks in the coating.
However, the cementitious coatings do not protect the walls against leakage if the
walls, and subsequently the coatings, are badly cracked as a result of unequal
foundation settlement, excessive drying shrinkage, and thermal changes. (‘‘Guide
to Shotcrete,’’ ACI 506, American Concrete Institute.)
   Two trowel coats of a mortar containing 1 part portland cement to 3 parts sand
by volume should be applied to the outside faces of basement walls built of hollow
masonry units. One trowel coat may suffice on the outside of all-brick and of brick-
faced walls.
   The wall surface and the top of the wall footing should be cleansed of dirt and
soil, and the masonry should be thoroughly wetted with water. While still damp,
the surface should be covered with a thin scrubbed-on coating of portland cement
tempered to the consistency of thick cream. Before this prepared surface has dried,
a 3⁄8-in-thick trowel-applied coating of mortar should be placed on the wall and
over the top of the footing; a fillet of mortar may be placed at the juncture of the
wall and footing.
   Where a second coat of mortar is to be applied, as on hollow masonry units,
the first coat should be scratched to provide a rough bonding surface. The second
coat should be applied at least 1 day after the first, and the coatings should be
cured and kept damp by wetting for at least 3 days. A water-repellent admixture
in the mortar used for the second or finish coat will reduce the rate of capillary
penetration of water through the walls. If a bituminous coating is not to be used,
the mortar coating should be kept damp until the backfill is placed.
   Thin, impervious coatings may be applied to the plaster if resistance to penetra-
tion of water vapor is desired. (See ACI 515.1R.) The plaster should be dry and
clean before the impervious coating is applied over the surfaces of the wall and the
top of the footing.


3.4.9   Impervious Membranes

These are waterproof barriers providing protection against penetration of water un-
der hydrostatic pressure and water vapor. To resist hydrostatic pressure, a membrane
should be made continuous in the walls and floor of a basement. It also should be
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                             3.23


protected from damage during building operations and should be laid by experi-
enced workers under competent supervision. It usually consists of three or more
alternate layers of hot, mopped-on asphalt or coal-tar pitch and plies of treated glass
fabric, or bituminous saturated cotton or woven burlap fabric. The number of mop-
pings exceeds the number of plies by one.
    Alternatives are cold-applied bituminous systems, liquid-applied membranes,
and sheet-applied membranes, similar to those used for roofing. In installation,
manufacturers’ recommendations should be carefully followed. See also ACI
515.1R and ‘‘The NRCA Waterproofing Manual,’’ National Roofing Manufacturers
Association.
    Bituminous saturated cotton fabric is stronger and is more extensible than bi-
tuminous saturated felt but is more expensive and more difficult to lay. At least one
or two of the plies in a membrane should be of saturated cotton fabric to provide
strength, ductility, and extensibility to the membrane. Where vibration, temperature
changes, and other conditions conducive to displacement and volume changes in
the basement are to be expected, the relative number of fabric plies may be in-
creased.
    The minimum weight of bituminous saturated felt used in a membrane should
be 13 lb per 100 ft2. The minimum weight of bituminous saturated woven cotton
fabric should be 10 oz / yd2.
    Although a membrane is held rigidly in place, it is advisable to apply a suitable
primer over the surfaces receiving the membrane and to aid in the application of
the first mopped-on coat of hot asphalt or coal-tar pitch.
    Materials used in the hot-applied system should meet the requirements of the
following current ASTM standards:
   Creosote primer for coal-tar pitch—D43
   Primer for asphalt—D41
   Coal-tar pitch—D450, Type II
   Asphalt—D449, Type A
   Cotton fabric, bituminous saturated—D173
   Woven burlap fabric, bituminous saturated—D1327
   Treated glass fabric—D1668
   Coal-tar saturated felt—D227
   Asphalt saturated organic felt—D226
    The number of plies of saturated felt or fabric should be increased with increase
in the hydrostatic head to which the membrane is to be subjected. Five plies is the
maximum commonly used in building construction, but 10 or more plies have been
recommended for pressure heads of 35 ft or greater. The thickness of the membrane
crossing the wall footings at the base of the wall should be no greater than nec-
essary, to keep very small the possible settlement of the wall due to plastic flow in
the membrane materials.
    The amount of primer to be used may be about 1 gal per 100 ft2. The amount
of bitumen per mopping should be at least 41⁄2 gal per 100 ft2. The thickness of
the first and last moppings is usually slightly greater than the thickness of the
moppings between the plies.
    The surfaces to which the membrane is to be applied should be smooth, dry,
and at a temperature above freezing. Air temperature should be not less than 50⬚F.
The temperature of coal-tar pitch should not exceed 300⬚F and asphalt, 350⬚F.
3.24                                SECTION THREE


    If the concrete and masonry surfaces are not sufficiently dry, they will not readily
absorb the priming coat, and the first mopping of bitumen will be accompanied by
bubbling and escape of steam. Should this occur, application of the membrane
should be stopped and the bitumen already applied to damp surfaces should be
removed.
    The membrane should be built up ply by ply, the strips of fabric or felt being
laid immediately after each bed has been hot-mopped. The lap of succeeding plies
or strips over each other depends on the width of the roll and the number of plies.
In any membrane there should be a lap of the top or final ply over the first, initial
ply of at least 2 in. End laps should be staggered at least 24 in, and the laps between
succeeding rolls should be at least 12 in.
    For floors, the membrane should be placed over a concrete base or subfloor
whose top surface is troweled smooth and which is level with the tops of the wall
footings. The membrane should be started at the outside face of one wall and extend
over the wall footing, which may be keyed. It should cover the floor and tops of
other footings to the outside faces of the other walls, forming a continuous hori-
zontal waterproof barrier. The plies should project from the edges of the floor
membrane and lap into the wall membrane.
    The loose ends of felt and fabric must be protected; one method is to fasten
them to a temporary vertical wood form about 2 ft high, placed just outside the
wall face. Immediately after the floor membrane has been laid, its surface should
be protected and covered with a layer of portland-cement concrete, at least 2 in
thick.
    For walls, the installed membrane should be protected against damage and held
in position by protection board or a facing of brick, tile, or concrete block. A brick
facing should have a minimum thickness of 21⁄2 in. Facings of asphalt plank, asphalt
block, or mortar require considerable support from the membrane itself and give
protection against abrasion of the membrane from lateral forces only. Protection
against downward forces such as may be produced by settlement of the backfill is
given only by the self-supporting masonry walls.
    The kind of protective facing may have some bearing on the method of con-
structing the membrane. The membrane may be applied to the exterior face of the
wall after its construction, or it may be applied to the back of the protective facing
before the main wall is built. The first of these methods is known as the outside
application; the second is known as the inside application.
    For the inside application, a protective facing of considerable stiffness against
lateral forces must be built, especially if the wall and its membrane are to be used
as a form for the casting of a main wall of monolithic concrete. The inner face of
the protecting wall must be smooth or else leveled with mortar to provide a suitable
base for the membrane. The completed membrane should be covered with a 3⁄8-in-
thick layer of mortar to protect it from damage during construction of the main
wall.
    Application of wall membranes should he started at the bottom of one end of
the wall and the strips of fabric or felt laid vertically. Preparation of the surfaces
and laying of the membrane proceed much as they do with floor membranes. The
surfaces to which the membrane is attached must be dry and smooth, which may
require that the faces of masonry walls be leveled with a thin coat of grout or
mortar. The plies of the wall membrane should be lapped into those of the floor
membrane.
    If the outside method of application is used and the membrane is faced with
masonry, the narrow space between the units and the membrane should be filled
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                           3.25


with mortar as the units are laid. The membrane may be terminated at the grade
line by a return into the superstructure wall facing.
    Waterstops in joints in walls and floors containing a bituminous membrane
should be the metal-bellows type. The membrane should be placed on the exposed
face of the joint and it may project into the joint, following the general outline of
the bellows.
    The protective facing for the membrane should be broken at the expansion joint
and the space between the membrane and the line of the facing filled with a joint
sealant, as recommended in ACI 504R.
    Details at pipe sleeves running through the membrane must be carefully pre-
pared. The membrane should be reinforced with additional plies and may be calked
at the sleeve. Steam and hot-water lines should be insulated to prevent damage to
the membrane.


3.4.10   Above-Grade Walls

The rate of moisture penetration through capillaries in above-grade walls is low
and usually of minor importance. However, such walls should not permit leakage
of wind-driven rain through openings larger than those of capillary dimension.
    Precast-concrete or metal panels are usually made of dense, highly water-
resistant materials. However, walls made of these panels are vulnerable to leakage
at the joints. In such construction, edges of the panels may be recessed and the
interior of vertical joints filled with grout or other sealant after the panels are
aligned.
   Calking compound is commonly used as a facing for the joints. Experience has
shown that calking compounds often weather badly; their use as a joint facing
creates a maintenance problem and does not prevent leakage of wind-driven rain
after a few years’ exposure.
   The amount of movement to be expected in the vertical joints between panels
is a function of the panel dimensions and the seasonal fluctuation in temperature
and, for concrete, the moisture content of the concrete. For panel construction, it
may be more feasible to use an interlocking water-resistant joint. For concrete, the
joint may be faced on the weather side with mortar and backed with either a
compressible premolded strip or calking. See ACI 504R.
   Brick walls 4 in or more in thickness can be made highly water-resistant. The
measures that need to be taken to ensure there will be no leakage of wind-driven
rain through brick facings are not extensive and do not require the use of materials
other than those commonly used in masonry walls. The main factors that need to
be controlled are the rate of suction of the brick at the time of laying and filling
of all joints with mortar (Art. 11.7).
   In general, the greater the number of brick leaves, or wythes, in a wall, the more
water-resistant the wall.
   Walls of hollow masonry units are usually highly permeable, and brick-faced
walls backed with hollow masonry units are greatly dependent upon the water
resistance of the brick facing to prevent leakage of wind-driven rain. For exterior
concrete masonry walls without facings of brick, protection against leakage may
be obtained by facing the walls with a cementitious coating of paint, stucco, or
shotcrete.
   For wall of rough-textured units, a portland cement–sand grout provides a highly
water-resistant coating. The cement may be either white or gray.
3.26                               SECTION THREE


   Factory-made portland-cement paints containing a minimum of 65%, and pref-
erably 80%, portland cement may also be used as a base coat on concrete masonry.
Application of the paint should conform with the requirements of ACI 515.1R. The
paints, stuccos, and shotcrete should be applied to dampened surfaces. Shotcrete
should conform with the requirements of ACI 506R.
   Cavity walls, particularly brick-faced cavity walls, may be made highly resistant
to leakage through the wall facing. However, as usually constructed, facings are
highly permeable, and the leakage is trapped in the cavity and diverted to the
outside of the wall through conveniently located weep holes. This requires that the
inner tier of the cavity be protected against the leakage by adequate flashings, and
weep holes should be placed at the bottom of the cavities and over all wall open-
ings. The weep holes may be formed by the use of sash-cord head joints or 3⁄8-in-
diameter rubber tubing, withdrawn after the wall is completed.
   Flashings should preferably be hot-rolled copper sheet of 10-oz minimum
weight. They should be lapped at the ends and sealed either by solder or with
bituminous plastic cement. Mortar should not be permitted to drop into the flashings
and prevent the weep holes from functioning.

Prevention of Cracking. Shrinkage of concrete masonry because of drying and a
drop in temperature may result in cracking of a wall and its cementitious facing.
Such cracks readily permit leakage of wind-driven rain. The chief factor reducing
incidence of shrinkage cracking is the use of dry block. When laid in the wall, the
block should have a low moisture content, preferably one that is in equilibrium
with the driest condition to which the wall will be exposed.
   The block should also have a low potential shrinkage. See moisture-content
requirements in ASTM C90 and method of test for drying shrinkage of concrete
block in ASTM C426.
   Formation of large shrinkage cracks may be controlled by use of steel reinforce-
ment in the horizontal joints of the masonry and above and below wall openings.
Where there may be a considerable seasonal fluctuation in temperature and moisture
content of the wall, high-yield-strength, deformed-wire joint reinforcement should
be placed in at least 50% of all bed joints in the wall.
   Use of control joints faced with calking compound has also been recommended
to control shrinkage cracking; however, this practice is marked by frequent failures
to keep the joints sealed against leakage of rain. Steel joint reinforcement strength-
ens a concrete masonry wall, whereas control joints weaken it, and the calking in
the joints requires considerable maintenance.

Water-Resistant Surface Treatments for Above-Grade Walls. Experience has
shown that leakage of wind-driven rain through masonry walls, particularly those
of brick, ordinarily cannot be stopped by use of an inexpensive surface treatment
or coating that will not alter the appearance of the wall. Such protective devices
either have a low service life or fail to stop all leakage.
    Both organic and cementitious pigmented coating materials, properly applied as
a continuous coating over the exposed face of the wall, do stop leakage. Many of
the organic pigmented coatings are vapor barriers and are therefore unsuitable for
use on the outside, ‘‘cold’’ face of most buildings. If vapor barriers are used on the
cold face of the wall, it is advisable to use a better vapor barrier on the warm face
to reduce condensation in the wall and behind the exterior coating.
    Coatings for masonry may be divided into four groups, as follows: (1) colorless
coating materials; (2) cementitious coatings; (3) pigmented organic coatings; and
(4) bituminous coatings.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                             3.27


    Colorless Coating Materials. The colorless ‘‘waterproofings’’ are often claimed
to stop leakage of wind-driven rain through permeable masonry walls. Solutions of
oils, paraffin wax, sodium silicate, chlorinated rubber, silicone resins, and salts of
fatty acids have been applied to highly permeable test walls and have been tested
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology under exposure conditions
simulating a wind-driven rain. Most of these solutions contained not more than
10% of solid matter. These treatments reduced the rate of leakage but did not stop
all leakage through the walls. The test data show that colorless coating materials
applied to permeable walls of brick or concrete masonry may not provide adequate
protection against leakage of wind-driven rain.
    Solutions containing oils and waxes tended to seal the pores exposed in the faces
of the mortar joints and masonry units, thereby acting more or less as vapor barriers,
but did not seal the larger openings, particularly those in the joints.
    Silicone water-repellent solutions greatly reduced leakage through the walls as
long as the treated wall faces remained water-repellent. After an exposure period
of 2 or 3 hr, the rate of leakage gradually increased as the water repellency of the
wall face diminished.
    Coatings of the water-repellent, breather type, such as silicone and ‘‘soap’’
solutions, may be of value in reducing absorption of moisture into the wall surface.
They may be of special benefit in reducing the soiling and disfiguration of stucco
facings and light-colored masonry surfaces. They may be applied to precast-
concrete panels to reduce volume changes that may otherwise result from changes
in moisture content of the concretes. However, it should be noted that a water-
repellent treatment applied to the surface may cause water, trapped in the masonry,
to evaporate beneath the surface instead of at the surface. If the masonry is not
water-resistant and contains a considerable amount of soluble salts, as evidenced
by efflorescence, application of a water repellent may cause salts to be deposited
beneath the surface, thereby causing spalling of the masonry. The water repellents
therefore should be applied only to walls having water-resistant joints. Furthermore,
application of a colorless material makes the treated face of the masonry water-
repellent and may prevent the proper bonding of a cementitious coating that could
otherwise be used to stop leakage.
    Cementitious Coatings. Coatings of portland-cement paints, grouts, and stuccos
and of pneumatically applied mortars are highly water-resistant. They are preferred
above all other types of surface coatings for use as water-resistant base coatings on
above-grade concrete masonry. They may also be applied to the exposed faces of
brick masonry walls that have not been built to be water-resistant.
    The cementitious coatings absorb moisture and are of the breather type, per-
mitting passage of water vapor. Addition of water repellents to these coatings does
not greatly affect their water resistance but does reduce the soiling of the surface
from the absorption of dirt-laden water. If more than one coating is applied, as in
a two-coat paint or stucco facing job, the repellent is preferably added only to the
finish coat, thus avoiding the difficulty of bonding a cementitious coating to a water-
repellent surface.
    The technique used in applying the cementitious coatings is highly important.
The backing should be thoroughly dampened. Paints and grouts should be scrubbed
into place with stiff fiber brushes and the coatings should be properly cured by
wetting. Properly applied, the grouts are highly durable; some grout coatings ap-
plied to concrete masonry test walls were found to be as water-resistant after 10
years out-of-doors exposure as when first applied to the walls.
    Pigmented Organic Coatings. These include textured coatings, mastic coatings,
conventional paints, and aqueous dispersions. The thick-textured and mastic coat-
ings are usually spray-applied but may be applied by trowel. Conventional paints
3.28                                SECTION THREE


and aqueous dispersions are usually applied by brush or spray. Most of these coat-
ings are vapor barriers but some textured coatings, conventional paints, and aqueous
dispersions are breathers. Except for the aqueous dispersions, all the coatings are
recommended for use with a primer.
    Applied as a continuous coating, without pinholes, the pigmented organic coat-
ings are highly water-resistant. They are most effective when applied over a smooth
backing. When they are applied with paintbrush or spray by conventional methods
to rough-textured walls, it is difficult to level the surface and to obtain a continuous
water-resistant coating free from holes. A scrubbed-on cementitious grout used as
a base coat on such walls will prevent leakage through the masonry without the
use of a pigmented organic coating.
    The pigmented organic coatings are highly decorative but may not be so water-
resistant, economical, or durable as the cementitious coatings.
    Bituminous Coatings. Bituminous cutbacks, emulsions, and plastic cements are
usually vapor barriers and are sometimes applied as ‘‘dampproofers’’ on the inside
faces of masonry walls. Plaster is often applied directly over these coatings, the
bond of the plaster to the masonry being only of a mechanical nature. Tests show
that bituminous coatings applied to the inside faces of highly permeable masonry
walls, not plastered, will readily blister and permit leakage of water through the
coating. It is advisable not to depend on such coatings to prevent the leakage of
wind-driven rain unless they are incorporated in the masonry or held in place with
a rigid self-sustaining backing.
    Even though the walls are resistant to wind-driven rain, but are treated on their
inner faces with a bituminous coating, water may be condensed on the warm side
of the coating and damage to the plaster may result, whether the walls are furred
or not. However, the bituminous coating may be of benefit as a vapor barrier in
furred walls, if no condensation occurs on the warm side.
    See also Secs. 9 and 11.
    (‘‘Admixtures for Concrete,’’ ACI 212.1R; ‘‘Guide for Use of Admixtures for
Concrete,’’ ACI 212.2R; ‘‘Guide to Joint Sealants for Concrete Structures,’’ ACI
504R; ‘‘Specification for Materials, Proportioning and Application of Shotcrete,’’
ACI 506.2; ‘‘A Guide to the Use of Waterproofing, Dampproofing, Protective and
Decorative Barrier Systems for Concrete,’’ ACI 515.1R; ‘‘Specification for Concrete
Masonry Construction,’’ ACI 531.1; ‘‘Polymers in Concrete,’’ ACI 548R; ‘‘Guide
for the Use of Polymers in Concrete,’’ ACI 548.1R, American Concrete Institute,
P.O. Box 19150, Redford Station, Detroit, MI 48219.)



3.5    PROTECTION AGAINST FIRE

There are two distinct aspects of fire protection: life safety and property protection.
Although providing for one aspect generally results in some protection for the other,
the two goals are not mutually inclusive. A program that provides for prompt no-
tification and evacuation of occupants meets the objectives for life safety, but pro-
vides no protection for property. Conversely, it is possible that adequate property
protection might not be sufficient for protection of life.
    Absolute safety from fire is not attainable. It is not possible to eliminate all
combustible materials or all potential ignition sources. Thus, in most cases, an
adequate fire protection plan must assume that unwanted fires will occur despite
the best efforts to prevent them. Means must be provided to minimize the losses
caused by the fires that do occur.
                            PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                             3.29


   The first obligation of designers is to meet legal requirements while providing
the facilities required by the client. In particular, the requirements of the applicable
building code must be met. The building code will contain fire safety requirements,
or it will specify some recognized standard by reference. Many owners will also
require that their own insurance carrier be consulted—to obtain the most favorable
insurance rate, if for no other reason.


3.5.1   Fire-Protection Standards

The standards most widely adopted are those published by the National Fire Pro-
tection Association (NFPA), Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269. The NFPA
‘‘National Fire Codes’’ comprise several volumes containing numerous standards,
updated annually. (These are also available separately.) The standards are supple-
mented by the NFPA ‘‘Fire Protection Handbook,’’ which contains comprehensive
and detailed discussion of fire problems and much valuable statistical and engi-
neering data.
    Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL), 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, IL
60062, publishes testing laboratory approvals of devices and systems in its ‘‘Fire
Protection Equipment List,’’ updated annually and by bimonthly supplements. The
publication outlines the tests that devices and systems must pass to be listed. The
UL ‘‘Building Materials List’’ describes and lists building materials, ceiling-floor
assemblies, wall and partition assemblies, beam and column protection, interior
finish materials, and other pertinent data. UL also publishes lists of ‘‘Accident
Equipment,’’ ‘‘Electrical Equipment,’’ ‘‘Electrical Construction Materials,’’ ‘‘Haz-
ardous Location Equipment,’’ ‘‘Gas and Oil Equipment,’’ and others.
    Separate standards for application to properties insured by the Factory Mutual
System are published by the Factory Mutual Engineering Corporation (FM), Nor-
wood, MA 02062. FM also publishes a list of devices and systems it has tested
and approved.
    The General Services Administration, acting for the federal government, has
developed many requirements that must be considered, if applicable. Also, the fed-
eral government encourages cities to adopt some uniform code. In addition, build-
ings must comply with provisions of the Americans with Disability Act (ADA).
(See Department of Justice final rules, Federal Register, 28 CFR Part 36, July 26,
1991; American National Standards Institute ‘‘Accessibility Standard,’’ ANSI
A117.1; ‘‘ADA Compliance Guidebook,’’ Building Owners and Managers Associ-
ation International, 1201 New York Ave., Washington, D.C. 20005.)
    The Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) sets standards for
protecting the health and safety of nearly all employees. It is not necessary that a
business be engaged in interstate commerce for the law to apply. OSHA defines
employer as ‘‘a person engaged in a business affecting commerce who has em-
ployees, but does not include the United States or any State or political subdivision
of a State.’’
    An employer is required to ‘‘furnish to each of his employees employment and
a place of employment which are free from recognized hazards that are causing or
are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to his employees.’’ Employers
are also required to ‘‘comply with occupational safety and health standards prom-
ulgated under the Act.’’
    Building codes consist of a set of rules aimed at providing reasonable safety to
the community, to occupants of buildings, and to the buildings themselves. The
codes may adopt the standards mentioned previously and other standards concerned
with fire protection by reference or adapt them to the specific requirements of the
3.30                               SECTION THREE


community. In the absence of a municipal or state building code, designers may
apply the provisions of the Uniform Building Code, promulgated by the Interna-
tional Conference of Building Officials, or other national model code.
    Many states have codes for safety to life in commercial and industrial buildings,
administered by the Department of Labor, the State Fire Marshal’s Office, the State
Education Department, or the Health Department. Some of these requirements are
drastic and must always be considered.
    Obtaining optimum protection for life and property can require consultation with
the owner’s insurance carrier, municipal officials, and the fire department. If the
situation is complicated enough, it can require consultation with a specialist in all
phases of fire protection and prevention. In theory, municipal building codes are
designed for life safety and for protection of the public, whereas insurance-oriented
codes (except for NFPA 101, ‘‘Life Safety Code’’) are designed to minimize prop-
erty fire loss. Since about 70% of any building code is concerned with fire protec-
tion, there are many circumstances that can best be resolved by a fire protection
consultant.


3.5.2   Fire-Protection Concepts

Although fires in buildings can be avoided, they nevertheless occur. Some of the
reasons for this are human error, arson, faulty electrical equipment, poor mainte-
nance of heating equipment, and natural causes, such as lightning. Consequently,
buildings should be designed to minimize the probability of a fire and to protect
life and limit property damage if a fire should occur. The minimum steps that should
be taken for the purpose are as follows:

 1. Limit potential fire loads, with respect to both combustibility and ability to
    generate smoke and toxic gases.
 2. Provide means for prompt detection of fires, with warnings to occupants who
    may be affected and notification of the presence of fire to fire fighters.
 3. Communication of instructions to occupants as to procedures to adopt for
    safety, such as to staying in place, proceeding to a designated refuge area, or
    evacuating the building.
 4. Provide means for early extinguishment of any fire that may occur, primarily
    by automatic sprinklers but also by trained fire fighters.
 5. Make available also for fire fighting an adequate water supply, appropriate
    chemicals, adequate-size piping, conveniently located valves on the piping,
    hoses, pumps, and other equipment necessary.
 6. Prevent spread of fire from building to building, either through adequate sep-
    aration or by enclosure of the building with incombustible materials.
 7. Partition the interior of the building with fire barriers, or divisions, to confine
    a fire to a limited space.
 8. Enclose with protective materials structural components that may be damaged
    by fire (fireproofing).
 9. Provide refuge areas for occupants and safe evacuation routes to outdoors.
10. Provide means for removal of heat and smoke from the building as rapidly as
    possible without exposing occupants to these hazards, with the air-conditioning
                            PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                            3.31


    system, if one is present, assisting the removal by venting the building and by
    pressurizing smokeproof towers, elevator shafts, and other exits.
11. For large buildings, install standby equipment for operation in emergencies of
    electrical systems and elevators.

   These steps are discussed in the following articles.


3.5.3   Fire Loads and Resistance Ratings

The nature and potential magnitude of fire in a building are directly related to the
amount and physical arrangement of combustibles present, as contents of the build-
ing or as materials used in its construction. Because of this, all codes classify
buildings by occupancy and construction, because these features are related to the
amount of combustibles.
    The total amount of combustibles is called the fire load of the building. Fire
load is expressed in pounds per square foot (psf ) of floor area, with an assumed
calorific value of 7000 to 8000 Btu / lb. (This Btu content applies to organic ma-
terials similar to wood and paper. Where other materials are present in large pro-
portion, the weights must be adjusted accordingly. For example, for petroleum prod-
ucts, fats, waxes, alcohol, and similar materials, the weights are taken at twice their
actual weights, because of the Btu content.)
    National Institute of Standards and Technology burnout tests presented in Re-
port BMS92 indicate a relation between fire load and fire severity as shown in
Table 3.2.
    The temperatures used in standard fire tests of building components are indicated
by the internationally recognized time-temperature curve shown in Fig. 3.9. Fire
resistance of construction materials, determined by standard fire tests, is expressed
in hours. The Underwriters Laboratories ‘‘Building Materials List’’ tabulates fire
ratings for materials and assemblies it has tested.


                      TABLE 3.2 Relation between Weight of
                      Combustibles and Fire Severity*

                          Average weight of         Equivalent fire
                          combustibles, psf          severity, hr
                                                            1
                                  5                             ⁄2
                                  71⁄2                      3
                                                                ⁄4
                                 10                       1
                                 15                       11⁄2
                                 20                       2
                                 30                       3
                                 40                       41⁄2
                                 50                       6
                                 60                       71⁄2
                           * Based on National Institute of Standards and
                      Technology Report BMS92, ‘‘Classifications of
                      Building Constructions,’’ Government Printing Of-
                      fice, Washington, D.C. 20402.
3.32                                SECTION THREE


                                                 Every building code specifies re-
                                             quired fire-resistance ratings for struc-
                                             tural members, exterior walls, fire divi-
                                             sions, fire separations, ceiling-floor
                                             assemblies, and any other constructions
                                             for which a fire rating is necessary. (Fire
                                             protection for structural steel is dis-
                                             cussed in Arts. 7.49 to 7.53. Design for
                                             fire resistance of steel deck in Arts.
                                             8.21.5 and 8.22.4. Design for fire safety
                                             with wood construction is covered in
                                             Art. 10.28.)
                                                 Building codes also specify the rat-
                                             ings required for interior finish of walls,
                                             ceilings and floors. These are classified
                                             as to flame spread, fuel contributed, and
                                             smoke developed, determined in stan-
FIGURE 3.9 Time-temperature curve for a      dard tests performed according to
standard fire test.                          ASTM E84 or ASTM E119.


3.5.4   Fire and Smoke Barriers

A major consideration in building design is safety of the community. Hence, build-
ings should be designed to control fires and smoke so that they will not spread
from building to building.
   One way that building codes try to achieve this objective is to establish fire
zones or fire limits that restrict types of construction or occupancy that can be used.
Additional zoning regulations establish minimum distances between buildings. An-
other way to achieve the objective is to specify the types of construction that can
be used for enclosing the exterior of buildings. The distance between adjoining
buildings, fire rating, and stability when exposed to fire of exterior walls, windows,
and doors, and percent of window area are some of the factors taken into account
in building codes for determination of the construction classification of a building.
   To prevent spread of fire from roof to roof, building codes also often require
that exterior walls extend as a parapet at least 3 ft above the roof level. Parapets
also are useful in shielding fire fighters who may be hosing a fire from roofs of
buildings adjoining the one on fire. In addition, buildings should be topped with
roof coverings that are fire-resistant.

Fire Divisions. To prevent spread of fire vertically in building interiors, building
codes generally require that floor-ceiling and roof-ceiling assemblies be fire-
resistant. The fire rating of such assemblies is one of the factors considered in
determination of the construction classification of a building. Also, openings in
floors and roofs should be fire-protected, although building codes do not usually
require this for one-story or two-story dwellings. For the purpose, an opening, such
as that for a stairway, may be protected with a fire-resistant enclosure and fire doors.
In particular, stairways and escalator and elevator shafts should be enclosed, not
only to prevent spread of fire and smoke but also to provide a protected means of
egress from the building for occupants and of approach to the fire source by fire
fighters.
    To prevent spread of fire and smoke horizontally in building interiors, it is de-
sirable to partition interiors with fire divisions. A fire division is any construction
                            PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                               3.33


with the fire-resistance rating and structural stability under fire conditions required
for the type of occupancy and construction of the building to bar the spread of fire
between adjoining buildings or between parts of the same building on opposite
sides of the division. A fire division may be an exterior wall, fire window, fire door,
fire wall, ceiling, or firestop.
    A fire wall should be built of incombustible material, have a fire rating of at
least 4 hr, and extend continuously from foundations to roof. Also, the wall should
have sufficient structural stability in a fire to allow collapse of construction on either
side without the wall collapsing. Building codes restrict the size of openings that
may be provided in a fire wall and require the openings to be fire-protected (Art.
11.55).
    To prevent spread of fire through hollow spaces, such spaces should be fire-
stopped. A firestop is a solid or compact, tight closure set in a hollow, concealed
space in a building to retard spread of flames, smoke, or hot gases. All partitions
and walls should be firestopped at every floor level, at the top-story ceiling level,
and at the level of support for roofs. Also, very large unoccupied attics should be
subdivided by firestops into areas of 3000 ft2 or less. Similarly, any large concealed
space between a ceiling and floor or roof should be subdivided. For the purpose,
firestops extending the full depth of the space should be placed along the line of
supports of structural members and elsewhere, if necessary, to enclose areas not
exceeding 1000 ft2 when situated between a floor and ceiling or 3000 ft2 when
located between a ceiling and roof.
    Openings between floors for pipes, ducts, wiring, and other services should be
sealed with the equal of positive firestops. Partitions between each floor and a
suspended ceiling above are not generally required to be extended to the slab above
unless this is necessary for required compartmentation. But smoke stops should be
provided at reasonable intervals to prevent passage of smoke to noninvolved areas.


3.5.5   Height and Area Restrictions

Limitations on heights and floor areas included between fire walls in any story of
a building are given in every building code and are directly related to occupancy
and construction. From the standpoint of fire protection, these provisions are chiefly
concerned with safety to life. They endeavor to ensure this through requirements
determining minimum number of exits, proper location of exits, and maximum
travel distance (hence escape time) necessary to reach a place of refuge. The lim-
itations are also aimed at limiting the size of fires.
    Unlimited height and area are permitted for the most highly fire-resistant type
of construction. Permissible heights and areas are decreased with decrease in fire
resistance of construction. Area permitted between fire walls in any story reduces
to 6000 ft2 for a one-story, wood-frame building.
    Installation of automatic sprinklers increases permissible heights and areas in all
classes, except those allowed unlimited heights and areas.
    Permissible unlimited heights and areas in fire-resistive buildings considered
generally satisfactory in the past may actually not be safe. A series of fires involv-
ing loss of life and considerable property damage opened the fire safety of such
construction to question. As a result, some cities have made more stringent the
building-code regulations applicable to high-rise buildings.
    Many building codes prohibit floor areas of unlimited size unless the building
is sprinklered. Without automatic sprinklers, floor areas must be subdivided into
fire-wall-protected areas of from 7500 to 15,000 ft2 and the enclosing fire walls
must have 1- or 2-hr fire ratings, depending on occupancy and construction.
3.34                                    SECTION THREE


   (‘‘Life Safety Handbook’’ and ‘‘Fire Protection Handbook,’’ National Fire Pro-
tection Association, Quincy, Mass.)


3.5.6    Fire-Resistance Classification of Buildings

Although building codes classify buildings by occupancy and construction, there is
no universal standard for number of classes of either occupancy or construction.
Table 3.3 lists some typical occupancy classifications and associates approximate
fire loads with them. This table should be used only as a guide. For a specific
project refer to the applicable local code. Note, however, that codes do not relate
life-safety hazards to the actual fire load, but deal with them through requirements
for exit arrangements, interior finishes, and ventilation.
    Types of construction may be classified by a local building code as follows but
may have further subdivisions, depending on fire-resistance requirements:

1.   Fire-resistive construction
2.   Protected noncombustible construction
3.   Unprotected noncombustible construction
4.   Heavy-timber construction
5.   Ordinary construction
6.   Wood-frame construction

The required fire resistance varies from 4 hr for exterior bearing walls and interior
columns in the highest fire resistive class to 1 hr for walls and none for columns
in the wood-frame construction class.


                      TABLE 3.3 Approximate Fire Loads for
                      Various Occupancies*

                                                       Typical average
                                                     fire load including
                      Occupancy class               floors and trim, psf
                        Assembly                             10.0
                        Business                             12.6
                        Educational                           7.6
                        High hazard                           †
                        Industrial                           25.0
                        Institutional                         5.7
                        Mercantile                          15–20
                        Residential                           8.8
                        Storage                              30.0
                          * From National Institute of Standards and Tech-
                      nology Report BMS92, ‘‘Classifications of Building
                      Constructions,’’ Government Printing Office, Wash-
                      ington. D.C. 20402.
                          † Special provisions are made for this class, and
                      hazards are treated for the specific conditions en-
                      countered, which might not necessarily be in pro-
                      portion to the actual fire load.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                           3.35


   Type of construction affects fire-protection-system design through requirements
that structural members as well as contents of buildings be protected.


3.5.7   Extinguishment of Fires

Design of all buildings should include provisions for prompt extinguishment of
fires. Apparatus installed for the purpose should take into account the nature and
amount of combustible and smoke-producing materials that may be involved in a
fire. Such apparatus may range from small, hand-held extinguishers for small fires
to hoses attached to a large, pressurized water supply and automatic fire sprinklers.
Also desirable are fire and smoke detectors and a protective signaling system that
sounds an alarm to alert building occupants and calls fire fighters.

Classes of Fires. For convenience in defining effectiveness of extinguishing me-
dia, Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., has developed a classification that separates
combustible materials into four types:
1. Class A fires involve ordinary combustibles and are readily extinguishable by
   water or cooling, or by coating with a suitable chemical powder.
2. Class B fires involve flammable liquids where smothering is effective and where
   a cooling agent must be applied with care.
3. Class C fires are those in live electrical equipment where the extinguishing agent
   must be nonconductive. Since a continuing electrical malfunction will keep the
   fire source active, circuit protection must operate to cut off current flow, after
   which an electrically conductive agent can be used with safety.
4. Class D fires involve metals that burn, such as magnesium, sodium, and pow-
   dered aluminum. Special powders are necessary for such fires, as well as special
   training for operators. These fires should never be attacked by untrained per-
   sonnel.

Automatic Sprinklers. The most widely used apparatus for fire protection in
buildings is the automatic sprinkler system. In one or more forms, automatic sprin-
klers are effective protection in all occupancy classes. Special treatment and use of
additional extinguishing agents, though, may be required in many high-hazard, in-
dustrial, and storage occupancies.
   Basically, a sprinkler system consists of a network of piping installed at the
ceiling or roof and supplied with water from a suitable source. On the piping at
systematic intervals are placed heat-sensitive heads, which discharge water when a
predetermined temperature is reached at any head. A gate valve is installed in the
main supply, and drains are provided. An alarm can be connected to the system so
that local and remote signals can be given when the water flows.
   Sprinkler systems are suitable for extinguishing all Class A fires and, in many
cases, also Class B and C fires. For Class B fires, a sealed (fusible) head system
may be used if the flammable liquid is in containers or is not present in large
quantity. Sprinklers have a good record for extinguishing fires in garages, for ex-
ample. An oil-spill fire can be extinguished or contained when the water is applied
in the form of spray, as from a sprinkler head. When an oil spill or process-pipe
rupture can release flammable liquid under pressure, an open-head (deluge) system
may be required to apply a large volume of water quickly and to keep surrounding
equipment cool.
3.36                               SECTION THREE


    For Class C fires, water can be applied to live electrical equipment if it is done
in the form of a nonconducting foglike spray. This is usually the most economical
way to protect outdoor oil-filled transformers and oil circuit breakers.
    Fire protection should be based on complete coverage of the building by the
sprinkler system. Partial coverage is rarely advisable, because extinguishing capac-
ity is based on detecting and extinguishing fires in their incipiency, and the system
must be available at all times in all places. Systems are not designed to cope with
fires that have gained headway after starting in unsprinklered areas.
    See also Arts. 14.27 to 14.29.

Standpipes. Hoses supplied with water from standpipes are the usual means of
manual application of water to interior building fires. Standpipes are usually de-
signed for this use by the fire department, but they can be used by building fire
fighters also.
   Standpipes are necessary in buildings higher than those that ground-based fire
department equipment can handle effectively. The Standard Building Code requires
standpipes in buildings higher than 50 ft. The Uniform Building Code requirement
starts at four stories or occupancies over 5000 ft2 in area and depends on whether
automatic sprinklers are installed.
   See also Art. 14.30.

Chemical Extinguishment. Fires involving some materials may not be readily
extinguished with water alone. When such materials may be present in a building,
provision should be made for application of appropriate chemicals.
    Foamed chemicals, mostly masses of air- or gas-filled bubbles, formed by
chemical or mechanical means, may be used to control fires in flammable liquids.
Foam is most useful in controlling fires in flammable liquids with low flash points
and low specific gravity, such as gasoline. The mass of bubbles forms a cohesive
blanket that extinguishes fire by excluding air and cooling the surface.
    Foam clings to horizontal surfaces and can also be used on vertical surfaces of
process vessels to insulate and cool. It is useful on fuel-spill fires, to extinguish
and confine the vapors.
    For fire involving water-soluble liquids, such as alcohol, a special foam concen-
trate must be used. Foam is not suitable for use on fires involving compressed
gases, such as propane, nor is it practical on live electrical equipment. Because of
the water content, foam cannot be used on fires involving burning metals, such as
sodium, which reacts with water. It is not effective on oxygen-containing materials.
    Three distinct types of foam are suitable for fire control: chemical foam, air
foam (mechanical foam), and high-expansion foam.
    Chemical foam was the first foam developed for fire fighting. It is formed by
the reaction of water with two chemical powders, usually sodium bicarbonate and
aluminum sulfate. The reaction forms carbon dioxide, which is the content of the
bubbles. This foam is the most viscous and tenacious of the foams. It forms a
relatively tough blanket, resistant to mechanical or heat disruption. The volume of
expansion may be as much as 10 times that of the water used in the solution.
    Chemical foam is sensitive to the temperature at which it is formed, and the
chemicals tend to deteriorate during long storage periods. It is not capable of being
transported through long pipe lines. For these reasons, it is not used as much as
other foams. National Fire Protection Association standard NFPA 11 covers chem-
ical foam.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                           3.37


   Air foam (mechanical foam) is made by mechanical mixing of water and a
protein-based chemical concentrate. There are several methods of combining the
components, but essentially the foam concentrate is induced into a flowing stream
of water through a metering orifice and a suitable device, such as a venturi. The
volume of foam generated is from 16 to 33 times the volume of water used. Several
kinds of mixing apparatus are available, choice depending on volume required,
availability of water, type of hazard, and characteristics of the protected area or
equipment.
   Air foam can be conducted through pipes and discharged through a fixed cham-
ber mounted in a bulk fuel storage tank, or it can be conducted through hoses and
discharged manually through special nozzles. This foam can also be distributed
through a sprinkler system of special design to cover small equipment, such as
process vessels, or in multisystem applications, over an entire airplane hangar. The
standard for use and installation of air foam is NFPA 11, and for foam-water sprin-
kler systems, NFPA 16.
   High-expansion foam was developed for use in coal mines, where its extremely
high expansion rate allowed it to be generated quickly in sufficient volume to fill
mine galleries and reach inaccessible fires. This foam can be generated in volumes
of from 100 to 1000 times the volume of water used, with the latter expansion in
most general use. The foam is formed by passage of air through a screen constantly
wetted by a solution of chemical concentrate, usually with a detergent base. The
foam can be conducted to a fire area by ducts, either fixed or portable, and can be
applied manually by small portable generators. Standard for equipment and use of
high-expansion foam is NFPA 11A.
   High-expansion foam is useful for extinguishing fires by totally flooding indoor
confined spaces, as well as for local application to specific areas. It extinguishes
by displacing air from the fire and by the heat-absorbing effect of converting the
foam water content into steam. The foam forms an insulating barrier for exposed
equipment or building components.
   High-expansion foam is more fragile than chemical or air foam. Also, it is not
generally reliable when used outdoors where it is subject to wind currents. High-
expansion foam is not toxic, but it has the effect of disorienting people who may
be trapped in it.
   Carbon dioxide is useful as an extinguishing agent, particularly on surface fires,
such as those involving flammable liquids in confined spaces. It is nonconductive
and is effective on live electrical equipment. Because carbon dioxide requires no
clean-up, it is desirable on equipment such as gasoline or diesel engines. The gas
can be used on Class A fires. But when a fire is deep-seated, an extended discharge
period is required to avoid rekindling.
   Carbon dioxide provides its own pressure for discharge and distribution and is
nonreactive with most common industrial materials. Because its density is 11⁄2 times
that of air, carbon dioxide tends to drop and to build up from the base of a fire.
Extinguishment of a fire is effected by reduction of the oxygen concentration sur-
rounding a fire.
   Carbon dioxide may be applied to concentrated areas or machines by hand-held
equipment, either carried or wheeled. Or the gas may be used to flood totally a
room containing a hazard. The minimum concentrations for total flooding for fires
involving some commercial liquids are listed in ‘‘Standard on Carbon-Dioxide
Extinguishing Systems,’’ NFPA 12.
   Carbon dioxide is not effective on fires involving burning metals, such as mag-
nesium, nor is it effective on oxygen-containing materials, such as nitrocellulose.
3.38                               SECTION THREE


Hazard to personnel is involved to the extent that a concentration of 9% will cause
suffocation in a few minutes, and concentrations of 20% can be fatal. When used
in areas where personnel are present, a time delay before discharge is necessary to
permit evacuation.
    For use in total flooding systems, carbon dioxide is available in either high-
pressure or low-pressure equipment. Generally, it is more economical to use low-
pressure equipment for large volumes, although there is no division point applicable
in all cases.
    Halon 1301 is one of a series of halogenated hydrocarbons, bromotrifluoro-
methane (CBrF2), used with varying degrees of effectiveness as a fire-extinguishing
agent and was included in the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the
Ozone Layer signed in September 16, 1987. It is currently limited to ‘‘critical uses’’
and is planned to be phased out by 2002. The types of uses currently defined as
critical are spaces where flammable liquid and / or gas release could occur in the
oil, gas, petrochemical and military sectors; manned communication centers of the
armed forces or other places essential for national security; or for the protection of
spaces where there may be a risk of dispersion of radioactive material.
    Dry chemical extinguishing agents were used originally to extinguish Class B
fires. One type consisted of a sodium bicarbonate base with additives to prevent
caking and to improve fluid flow characteristics. Later, multipurpose dry chemicals
effective on Class A, B, and C fires were developed. These chemicals are distinctly
different from the dry powder extinguishing agents used on combustible metals
described below.
    Dry chemicals are effective on surface fires, especially on flammable liquids.
When used on Class A fires, they do not penetrate into the burning material. So
when a fire involves porous or loosely packed material, water is used as a backup.
The major effect of dry chemicals is due almost entirely to ability to break the
chain reaction of combustion. A minor effect of smothering is obtained on Class
A fires.
    Fires that are likely to rekindle are not effectively controlled by dry chemicals.
When these chemicals are applied to machinery or equipment at high temperatures,
caking can cause some difficulty in cleaning up after the fire.
    Dry chemicals can be discharged in local applications by hand-held extinguish-
ers, wheeled portable equipment, or nozzles on hose lines. These chemicals can
also be used for extinguishing fires by total flooding, when they are distributed
through a piped system with special discharge nozzles. The expellant gas is usually
dry nitrogen.
    Dry powder extinguishing agents are powders effective in putting out com-
bustible-metal fires. There is no universal extinguisher that can be used on all fires
involving combustible metals. Such fires should never be fought by untrained per-
sonnel.
    There are several proprietary agents effective on several metals, but none should
be used without proper attention to the manufacturer’s instructions and the specific
metal involved. For requirements affecting handling and processing of combustible
metals, reference should be made to National Fire Protection Association standards
NFPA 48 and 652 for magnesium, NFPA 481 for titanium, NFPA 482M for zir-
conium, and NFPA 65 and 651 for aluminum.
    (‘‘The SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering,’’ and ‘‘Automatic Sprin-
kler Systems Handbook,’’ National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, Mass.)

3.5.8   Fire Detection
Every fire-extinguishing activity must start with detection. To assist in this, many
types of automatic detectors are available, with a wide range of sensitivity. Also, a
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                             3.39


variety of operations can be performed by the detection system. It can initiate an
alarm, local or remote, visual or audible; notify a central station; actuate an extin-
guishing system; start or stop fans or processes, or perform any other operation
capable of automatic control.
   There are five general types of detectors, each employing a different physical
means of operation. The types are designated fixed-temperature, rate-of-rise, photo-
electric, combustion-products, and ultraviolet or infrared detectors.
   A wide variety of detectors has been tested and reported on by Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. See Art. 3.5.1.

Fixed-Temperature Detectors. In its approval of any detection device, UL spec-
ifies the maximum distance between detectors to be used for area coverage. This
spacing should not be used without competent judgment. In arriving at the permitted
spacing for any device, UL judges the response time in comparison with that of
automatic sprinkler heads spaced at 10-ft intervals. Thus, if a device is more sen-
sitive than a sprinkler head, the permitted spacing is increased until the response
times are nearly equal. If greater sensitivity is desired, the spacing must be reduced.
    With fixed-temperature devices, there is a thermal lag between the time the
ambient temperature reaches rated temperature and the device itself reaches that
temperature. For thermostats having a rating of 135⬚F, the ambient temperature can
reach 206⬚F.
    Disk thermostats are the cheapest and most widely used detectors. The most
common type employs the principle of unequal thermal expansion in a bimetallic
assembly to operate a snap-action disk at a preset temperature, to close electrical
contacts. These thermostats are compact. The disk, 1⁄2 in in diameter, is mounted
on a plastic base 13⁄4 in in diameter. The thermostats are self-resetting, the contacts
being disconnected when normal temperature is restored.
    Thermostatic cable consists of two sheathed wires separated by a heat-sensitive
coating which melts at high temperature, allowing the wires to contact each other.
The assembly is covered by a protective sheath. When any section has functioned,
it must be replaced.
    Continuous detector tubing is a more versatile assembly. This detector consists
of a small-diameter Inconel tube, of almost any length, containing a central wire,
separated from the tube by a thermistor element. At elevated temperatures, the
resistance of the thermistor drops to a point where a current passes between the
wire and the tube. The current can be monitored, and in this way temperature
changes over a wide range, up to 1000⬚F, can be detected. The detector can be
assembled to locate temperature changes of different magnitudes over the same
length of detector. It is self-restoring when normal temperature is restored. This
detector is useful for industrial applications, as well as for fire detection.
    Fusible links are the same devices used in sprinkler heads and are made to
operate in the same temperature range. Melting or breaking at a specific tempera-
ture, they are used to restrain operation of a fire door, electrical switch, or similar
mechanical function, such as operation of dampers. Their sensitivity is substantially
reduced when installed at a distance below a ceiling or other heat-collecting ob-
struction.

Rate-of-Rise Detectors. Detectors and detector systems are said to operate on the
rate-of-rise principle when they function on a rapid increase in temperature, whether
the initial temperature is high or low. The devices are designed to operate when
temperature rises at a specified number of degrees, usually 10 or 15⬚F, per minute.
They are not affected by normal temperature increases and are not subject to ther-
mal lag, as are fixed-temperature devices.
3.40                                SECTION THREE


Photoelectric Detectors. These indicate a fire condition by detecting the smoke.
Sensitivity can be adjusted to operate when obscuration is as low as 0.4% per ft.
In these devices, a light source is directed so that it does not impinge on a photo-
electric cell. When sufficient smoke particles are concentrated in the chamber, their
reflected light reaches the cell, changing its resistance and initiating a signal.
    These detectors are particularly useful when a potential fire is likely to generate
a substantial amount of smoke before appreciable heat and flame erupt. A fixed-
temperature, snap-action disk is usually included in the assembly.

Combustion-Products Detectors. Two physically different means, designated ion-
ization type and resistance-bridge type, are used to operate combustion-products
detectors.
    The ionization type, most generally used, employs ionization of gases by alpha
particles emitted by a small quantity of radium or americum. The detector contains
two ionization chambers, one sealed and the other open to the atmosphere, in elec-
trical balance with a cold-cathode tube or transistorized amplifier. When sufficient
combustion products enter the open chamber, the electrical balance is upset, and
the resulting current operates a relay.
    The resistance-bridge type of detector operates when combustion products
change the impedance of an electric bridge grid circuit deposited on a glass plate.
    Combustion-products detectors are designed for extreme early warning, and are
most useful when it is desirable to have warning of impending combustion when
combustion products are still invisible. These devices are sensitive in some degree
to air currents, temperature, and humidity, and should not be used without consul-
tation with competent designers.

Flame Detectors. These discriminate between visible light and the light produced
by combustion reactions. Ultraviolet detectors are responsive to flame having wave-
lengths up to 2850 Å. The effective distance between flame and detectors is about
10 ft for a 5-in-diam pan of gasoline, but a 12-in-square pan fire can be detected
at 30 ft.
   Infrared detectors are also designed to detect flame. These are not designated
by range of wavelength because of the many similar sources at and above the
infrared range. To identify the radiation as a fire, infrared detectors usually employ
the characteristic flame flicker, and have a built-in time delay to eliminate accidental
similar phenomena.
   (‘‘The SFPE Handbook of Fire Detection Engineering,’’ National Fire Protection
Association, Quincy, Mass.)


3.5.9   Smoke and Heat Venting

In extinguishment of any building fire, the heat-absorption capacity of water is the
principal medium of reducing the heat release from the fire. When, however, a fire
is well-developed, the smoke and heat must be released from confinement to make
the fire approachable for final manual action. If smoke and heat venting is not
provided in the building design, holes must be opened in the roof or building sides
by the fire department. In many cases, it has been impossible to do this, with total
property losses resulting.
   Large-area, one-story buildings can be provided with venting by use of monitors,
or a distribution of smaller vents. Multistory buildings present many problems,
particularly since life safety is the principal consideration in these buildings.
                             PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                         3.41


   Ventilation facilities should be provided in addition to the protection afforded
by automatic sprinklers and hose stations.

Large One-Story Buildings. For manufacturing purposes, low buildings are fre-
quently required to be many hundreds of feet in each horizontal dimension. Lack
of automatic sprinklers in such buildings has proven to be disastrous where adequate
smoke and heat venting has not been provided. Owners generally will not permit
fire division walls, because they interfere with movement and processing of mate-
rials. With the whole content of a building subject to the same fire, fire protection
and venting are essential to prevent large losses in windowless buildings under-
ground structures, and buildings housing hazardous operations.
    There is no accepted formula for determining the exact requirements for smoke
and heat venting. Establishment of guidelines is the nearest approach that has been
made to venting design, and these must be adapted to the case at hand. Consider-
ation must be given to quantity, shape, size, and combustibility of contents.
    Venting Ratios. The ratio of effective vent opening to floor area should be at
least that given in Table 3.4.
    Venting can be accomplished by use of monitors, continuous vents, unit-type
vents, or sawtooth skylights. In moderate-sized buildings exterior-wall windows
may be used if they are near the eaves.
    Monitors must be provided with operable panels or other effective means of
providing openings at the required time.
    Continuous gravity vents are continuous narrow slots provided with a weather
hood above. Movable shutters can be provided and should be equipped to open
automatically in a fire condition.
    Vent Spacing. Unit-type vents are readily adapted to flat roofs, and can be
installed in any required number, size, and spacing. They are made in sizes from
4 ⫻ 4 ft to 10 ⫻ 10 ft, with a variety of frame types and means of automatic
opening. In arriving at the number and size of vents, preference should be given
to a large number of small vents, rather than a few large vents. Because it is
desirable to have a vent as near as possible to any location where a fire can start,
a limit should be placed on the distance between units. Table 3.5 lists the generally
accepted maximum distance between vents.
    Releasing Methods. Roof vents should be automatically operated by means that
do not require electric power. They also should be capable of being manually op-
erated. Roof vents approved by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., are available from
a number of manufacturers.
    Refer to National Fire Protection Association standard NFPA 204 in designing
vents for large, one-story buildings. Tests conducted prior to publication of NFPA
231C indicated that a sprinkler system designed for adequate density of water ap-
plication will eliminate the need for roof vents, but the designers would be well
advised to consider the probable speed of fire and smoke development in making
a final decision. NFPA 231C covers the rack storage of materials as high as 20 ft.


TABLE 3.4 Minimum Ratios of Effective        TABLE 3.5 Maximum Distance between
Vent Area to Floor Area                      Vents, Ft

Low-heat-release contents          1:150     Low-heat-release contents          150
Moderate-heat-release contents     1:100     Moderate-heat-release contents     120
High-heat-release contents       1:30–1:50   High-heat-release contents       75–100
3.42                                SECTION THREE


High-Rise Buildings. Building codes vary in their definition of high-rise build-
ings, but the intent is to define buildings in which fires cannot be fought successfully
by ground-based equipment and personnel. Thus, ordinarily, high-rise means build-
ings 100 ft or more high. In design for smoke and heat venting, however, any
multistory building presents the same problems.
    Because smoke inhalation has been the cause of nearly all fatalities in high-rise
buildings, some building codes require that a smoke venting system be installed
and made to function independently of the air-conditioning system. Also, smoke
detectors must be provided to actuate exhaust fans and at the same time warn the
fire department and the building’s control center. The control center must have two-
way voice communication, selectively, with all floors and be capable of issuing
instructions for occupant movement to a place of safety.
    Because the top story is the only one that can be vented through the roof, all
other stories must have the smoke conducted through upper stories to discharge
safely above the roof. A separate smoke shaft extending through all upper stories
will provide this means. It should be provided with an exhaust fan and should be
connected to return-air ducts with suitable damper control of smoke movement, so
that smoke from any story can be directed into the shaft. The fan and dampers
should be actuated by smoke detectors installed in suitable locations at each inlet
to return-air ducts. Operation of smoke detectors also should start the smoke-vent-
shaft fan and stop supply-air flow. Central-station supervision (Art. 3.5.12) should
be provided for monitoring smoke-detector operation. Manual override controls
should be installed in a location accessible under all conditions.
    Windows with fixed sash should be provided with means for emergency opening
by the fire department.
    Pressurizing stair towers to prevent the entrance of smoke is highly desirable
but difficult to accomplish. Most standpipe connections are usually located in stair
towers, and it is necessary to open the door to the fire floor to advance the hose
stream toward the fire. A more desirable arrangement would be to locate the riser
in the stair tower, if required by code, and place the hose valve adjacent to the
door to the tower. Some codes permit this, and it is adaptable to existing buildings.
    (‘‘The SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering,’’ National Fire Protection
Association, Quincy, Mass.)


3.5.10   Emergency Egress

In addition to providing means for early detection of fire, preventing its spread, and
extinguishing it speedily, building designers should also provide the appropriate
number, sizes, and arrangements of exits to permit quick evacuation of occupants
if fire or other conditions dangerous to life occur. Buildings should be designed to
preclude development of panic in emergencies, especially in confined areas where
large numbers of persons may assemble. Hence, the arrangement of exit facilities
should permit occupants to move freely toward exits that they can see clearly and
that can be reached by safe, unobstructed, uncongested paths. Redundancy is highly
desirable; there should be more than one path to safety, so that loss of a single path
will not prevent escape of occupants from a danger area. The paths should be
accessible to and usable by handicapped persons, including those in wheelchairs,
if they may be occupants.
    Building codes generally contain requirements for safe, emergency egress from
buildings. Such requirements also are concisely presented in the ‘‘Life Safety Code’’
of the National Fire Protection Association.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                            3.43


Egress Components. Many building codes define an exit as a safe means of egress
from the interior of a building to an open exterior space beyond the reach of a
building fire or give an equivalent definition. Other codes consider an exterior door
or a stairway leading to access to such a door to be an exit. To prevent misunder-
standings, the ‘‘Life Safety Code’’ defines a means of egress composed of three
parts.
   Accordingly, a means of egress is a continuous, unobstructed path for evacuees
from any point in a building to a public way. Its three parts are:

   Exit access—that portion that leads to an entrance to an exit
   Exit—the portion that is separated from all other building spaces by construction
   or equipment required to provide a protected path to the exit discharge
   Exit discharge—the portion that connects the termination of an exit to a public
   way

    Means of egress may be provided by exterior and interior doors and enclosed
horizontal and vertical passageways, including stairs and escalators. (Elevators and
exterior fire escapes are not generally recognized as reliable means of egress in a
fire.) Exit access includes the space from which evacuation starts and passageways
and doors that must be traversed to reach an exit.

Types of Exits. Building codes generally recognize the following as acceptable
exits when they meet the codes’ safety requirements:

   Corridors—enclosed horizontal or slightly inclined public passageways, which
   lead from interior spaces toward an exit discharge. Minimum floor-to-ceiling
   height permitted is generally 80 in. Minimum width depends on type of occu-
   pancy and passageway (Table 3.7 and Art. 3.5.11). Codes may require subdi-
   vision of corridors into lengths not exceeding 300 ft for educational buildings
   and 150 ft for institutional buildings. Subdivision should be accomplished with
   noncombustible partitions incorporating smokestop doors. In addition, codes
   may require the corridor enclosures to have a fire rating of 1 or 2 hr.
   Exit passageways—horizontal extensions of vertical passageways. Minimum
   floor-to-ceiling height is the same as for corridors. Width should be at least that
   of the vertical passageways. Codes may require passageway enclosures to have
   a 2-hr fire rating. A street-floor lobby may serve as an exit passageway if it is
   sufficiently wide to accommodate the probable number of evacuees from all
   contributing spaces at the lobby level.
   Exit doors—doors providing access to streets or to stairs or exit passageways.
   Those at stairs or passageways should have a fire rating of at least 3⁄4 hr.
   Horizontal exit—passageway to a refuge area. The exit may be a fire door
   through a wall with a 2-hr fire rating, a balcony providing a path around a fire
   barrier, or a bridge or tunnel between two buildings. Doors in fire barriers with
   3- or 4-hr fire ratings should have a 11⁄2-hr rated door on each face of the fire
   division. Walls permitted to have a lower fire rating may incorporate a single
   door with a rating of at least 11⁄2 hr. Balconies, bridges, and tunnels should be
   at least as wide as the doors providing access to them, and enclosures or sides
   of these passageways should have a fire rating of 2 hr or more. Exterior-wall
   openings, below or within 30 ft of an open bridge or balcony, should have at
   least 3⁄4-hr fire protection.
3.44                               SECTION THREE


   Interior stairs—stairs that are inside a building and that serve as an exit. Except
   in one-story or two-story low-hazard buildings, such stairs should be built of
   noncombustible materials. Stairway enclosures generally should have a 2-hr fire
   rating. Building codes, however, may exempt low dwellings from this require-
   ment.
   Exterior stairs—stairs that are open to the outdoors and that serve as an exit
   to ground level. Height of such stairs is often limited to 75 ft or six stories. The
   stairs should be protected by a fire-resistant roof and should be built of noncom-
   bustible materials. Wall openings within 10 ft of the stairs should have 3⁄4-hr fire
   protection.
   Smokeproof tower—a continuous fire-resistant enclosure protecting a stairway
   from fire or smoke in a building. At every floor, a passageway should be pro-
   vided by vestibules or balconies directly open to the outdoors and at least 40 in
   wide. Tower enclosures should have a 2-hr fire rating. Access to the vestibules
   or balconies and entrances to the tower should be provided by doorways at least
   40 in wide, protected by self-closing fire doors.
   Escalators—moving stairs. Building codes may permit their use as exits if they
   meet the safety requirements of interior stairs and if they move in the direction
   of exit travel or stop gradually when an automatic fire-detection system signals
   a fire.
   Moving walks—horizontal or inclined conveyor belts for passengers. Building
   codes may permit their use as exits if they meet the safety requirements for exit
   passageways and if they move in the direction of exit travel or stop gradually
   when an automatic fire-detection system signals a fire.

Refuge Areas. A refuge area is a space protected against fire and smoke. When
located within a building, the refuge should be at about the same level as the areas
served and separated from them by construction with at least a 2-hr fire rating.
Access to the refuge areas should be protected by fire doors with a fire rating of
11⁄2 hr or more.
    A refuge area should be large enough to shelter comfortably its own occupants
plus those from other spaces served. The minimum floor area required may be
calculated by allowing 3 ft2 of unobstructed space for each ambulatory person and
30 ft2 per person for hospital or nursing-home patients. Each refuge area should be
provided with at least one horizontal or vertical exit, such as a stairway, and in
locations more than 11 stories above grade, with at least one elevator.

Location of Exits. Building codes usually require a building to have at least two
means of egress from every floor. Exits should be remote from each other, to reduce
the chance that both will be blocked in an emergency.
    All exit access facilities and exits should be located so as to be clearly visible
to building occupants or signs should be installed to indicate the direction of travel
to the exits. Signs marking the locations of exits should be illuminated with at least
5 ft-c of light. Floors of means of egress should be illuminated with at least 1 ft-c
of artificial light whenever the building is occupied.
    If an open floor area does not have direct access to an exit, a protected, contin-
uous passageway should be provided directly to an exit. The passageway should
be kept open at all times. Occupants using the passageway should not have to pass
any high-hazard areas not fully shielded.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                            3.45


    To ensure that occupants will have sufficient escape time in emergencies, build-
ing codes limit the travel distance from the most remote point in any room or space
to a door that opens to an outdoor space, stairway, or exit passageway. The maxi-
mum travel distance permitted depends on the type of occupancy and whether the
space is sprinklered. For example, for corridors not protected by sprinklers, maxi-
mum permitted length may range from 100 ft for storage and institutional buildings
to 150 ft for residential, mercantile, and industrial occupancies. With sprinkler pro-
tection, permitted length may range from 150 ft for high-hazard and storage build-
ings to 300 ft for commercial buildings, with 200 ft usually permitted for other
types of occupancies.
    Building codes also may prohibit or limit the lengths of passageways or courts
that lead to a dead end. For example, a corridor that does not terminate at an exit
is prohibited in high-hazard buildings. For assembly, educational, and institutional
buildings, the maximum corridor length to a dead end may not exceed 30 ft,
whereas the maximum such length is 40 ft for residential buildings and 50 ft for
all other occupancies, except high-hazard.


3.5.11   Required Exit Capacity

Minimum width of a passageway for normal use is 36 in. This is large enough to
accommodate one-way travel for persons on crutches or in wheelchairs. For two-
way travel, a 60-in width is necessary. (A corridor, however, need not be 60 in
wide for its full length, if 60 ⫻ 60-in passing spaces, alcoves, or corridor intersec-
tions are provided at short intervals.) Building codes, however, may require greater
widths to permit rapid passage of the anticipated number of evacuees in emergen-
cies. This number depends on a factor called the occupant load, but the minimum
width should be ample for safe, easy passage of handicapped persons. Running
slope should not exceed 1:20, and cross slope, 1:50.
    Occupant load of a building space is the maximum number of persons that
may be in the space at any time. Building codes may specify the minimum per-
mitted capacity of exits in terms of occupant load, given as net floor area, square
feet, per person, for various types of occupancy (Table 3.6). The number of occu-
pants permitted in a space served by the exits then can be calculated by dividing
the floor area, square feet, by the specified occupant load.
    The occupant load of any space should include the occupant load of other spaces
if the occupants have to pass through that space to reach an exit.
    With the occupant load known, the required width for an exit or an exit door
can be determined by dividing the occupant load on the exit by the capacity of the
exit.
    Capacities of exits and access facilities generally are measured in units of width
of 22 in, and the number of persons per unit of width is determined by the type of
occupancy. Thus, the number of units of exit width for a doorway is found by
dividing by 22 the clear width of the doorway when the door is in the open position.
(Projections of stops and hinge stiles may be disregarded.) Fractions of a unit of
width less than 12 in should not be credited to door capacity. If, however, 12 in or
more is added to a multiple of 22 in, one-half unit of width can be credited. Building
codes indicate the capacities in persons per unit of width that may be assumed for
various means of egress. Recommendations of the ‘‘Life Safety Code’’ of the Na-
tional Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02269, are sum-
marized in Table 3.7.
 3.46                    SECTION THREE


TABLE 3.6 Typical Occupant Load Requirements for
Types of Occupancy

                                                            Net floor
                                                             area per
                                                            occupant,
                    Occupancy                                   ft2
Auditoriums                                                      7
Billiard rooms                                                  50
Bowling alleys                                                  50
Classrooms                                                      20
Dance floors                                                     7
Dining spaces (nonresidential)                                  12
Exhibition spaces                                               10
Garages and open parking structures                           250
Gymnasiums                                                      15
Habitable rooms                                               200
Industrial shops                                              200
  In schools                                                    50
Institutional sleeping rooms                                  120
Kindergartens                                                   35
Kitchens (nonresidential)                                     200
Laboratories                                                    50
  Preparation rooms                                           100
Libraries                                                       25
Locker rooms                                                    12
Offices                                                       100
Passenger terminals or platforms                              1.5C*
Sales areas (retail)                                            30
  First floor or basement
  Other floors                                                 60
Seating areas (audience) in places of assembly                 D†
  Fixed seats
  Movable seats                                                10
Skating rinks                                                  15
Stages                                                        S‡
Storage rooms                                                 300
    * C ⫽ capacity of all passenger vehicles that can be unloaded
simultaneously.
    † D ⫽ number of seats or occupants for which space is to be used.
    ‡ S ⫽ 75 persons per unit of width of exit openings serving a stage
directly, or one person per 15 ft of performing area plus one person
per 50 ft2 of remaining area plus number of seats that may be placed
for an audience on stage.
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                             3.47


              TABLE 3.7 Capacities, Persons per Unit of Width, for
              Means of Egress

              Level egress components, including doors               100
              Stairway                                                60
              Ramps 44 in or more wide, slope not more than 10%      100
              Narrower or steeper ramps
                Up                                                    60
                Down                                                 100



3.5.12   Building Operation in Emergencies

For buildings that will be occupied by large numbers of persons, provision should
be made for continuation of services essential to safe, rapid evacuation of occupants
in event of fire or other emergencies and for assisting safe movement of fire fighters,
medical personnel, or other aides.
    Standby electric power, for example, should be available in all buildings to
replace the basic power source if it should fail. The standby system should be
equipped with a generator that will start automatically when normal power is cut
off. The emergency power supply should be capable of operating all emergency
electric equipment at full power within 1 min of failure of normal service. Such
equipment includes lights for exits, elevators for fire fighters’ use, escalators and
moving walks designated as exits, exhaust fans and pressurizing blowers, com-
munication systems, fire detectors, and controls needed for fire fighting and life
safety during evacuation of occupants.
    In high-rise buildings, at least one elevator should be available for control by
fire fighters and to give them access to any floor from the street-floor lobby. Also,
elevator controls should be designed to preclude elevators from stopping automat-
ically at floors affected by fire.
    Supervision of emergency operations can be efficiently provided by personnel
at a control center placed in a protected area. This center may include a computer,
supplemented by personnel performing scheduled maintenance, and should be ca-
pable of continuously monitoring alarms, gate valves on automatic fire sprinklers,
temperatures, air and water pressures, and perform other pertinent functions. Also,
the center should be capable in emergencies of holding two-way conversations with
occupants and notifying police and fire departments of the nature of the emergen-
cies. In addition, provision should be made for the control center to dispatch in-
vestigators to sources of potential trouble or send maintenance personnel to make
emergency repairs when necessary. Standards for such installations are NFPA 72A,
‘‘Local Protective Signaling Systems,’’ NFPA 72B, ‘‘Auxiliary Protective Signaling
Systems,’’ NFPA 72C, ‘‘Remote Station Protective Signaling Systems,’’ and NFPA
72D. ‘‘Proprietary Protective Signaling Systems.’’ See also Art. 3.7.2.
    For economical building operation, the emergency control center may be made
part of a control center used for normal building operation and maintenance. Thus,
the control center may normally control HVAC to conserve energy, turn lights on
and off, and schedule building maintenance and repair. When an emergency occurs,
emergency control should be activated in accordance with prepared plans for han-
dling each type of emergency.
    The control center need not be located within the building to be supervised nor
operated by in-house personnel. Instead, an external central station may provide the
3.48                               SECTION THREE


necessary supervision. Such services are available in most cities and are arranged
by contract, usually with an installation charge and an annual maintenance charge.
Requirements for such systems are in National Fire Protection Association standard
NFPA 71.


3.5.13   Safety during Construction

Most building codes provide specific measures that must be taken for fire protection
during construction of buildings. But when they do not, fundamental fire-safety
precautions must be taken. Even those structures that will, when completed, be
noncombustible contain quantities of forming and packing materials that present a
serious fire hazard.
    Multistory buildings should be provided with access stairways and, if applicable,
an elevator for fire department use. Stairs and elevator should follow as closely as
possible the upward progress of the structure and be available within one floor of
actual building height. In buildings requiring standpipes, the risers should be placed
in service as soon as possible, and as close to the construction floor as practicable.
Where there is danger of freezing, the water supply can consist of a Siamese con-
nection for fire department use.
    In large-area buildings, required fire walls should be constructed as soon as
possible. Competent watchman service also should be provided.
    The greatest source of fires during construction is portable heaters. Only the
safest kind should be used, and these safeguarded in every practical way. Fuel
supplies should be isolated and kept to a minimum.
    Welding operations also are a source of fires. They should be regulated in ac-
cordance with building-code requirements.
    Control of tobacco smoking is difficult during building construction, so control
of combustible materials is necessary. Good housekeeping should be provided, and
all combustible materials not necessary for the work should be removed as soon as
possible.
    Construction offices and shanties should be equipped with adequate portable
extinguishers. So should each floor in a multistory building.



3.6    LIGHTNING PROTECTION

Lightning, a high-voltage, high-current electrical discharge between clouds and the
ground, may strike and destroy life and property anywhere thunderstorms have
occurred in the past. Buildings and their occupants, however, can be protected
against this hazard by installation of a special electrical system. Because an incom-
plete or poor installation can cause worse damage or injuries than no protection at
all, a lightning-protection system should be designed and installed by experts.
    As an addition to other electrical systems required for a building, a lightning-
protection system increases the construction cost of a building. A building owner
therefore has to decide whether potential losses justify the added expenditure. In
doing so, the owner should take into account the importance of the building, danger
to occupants, value and nature of building contents, type of construction, proximity
of other structures or trees, type of terrain, height of building, number of days per
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                             3.49


year during which thunderstorms may occur, costs of disruption of business or other
activities and the effects of loss of essential services, such as electrical and com-
munication systems. (Buildings housing flammable or explosive materials generally
should have lightning protection.) Also, the owner should compare the cost of
insurance to cover losses with the cost of the protection system.


3.6.1   Characteristics of Lightning

Lightning strikes are associated with thunderstorms. In such storms, the base of the
clouds generally develops a negative electrical charge, which induces a positive
charge in the earth directly below. As the clouds move, the positive charges, being
attracted by the negative charges, follow along the surface of the earth and climb
up buildings, antennas, trees, power transmission towers, and other conducting or
semiconducting objects along the path. The potential between clouds and earth may
build up to 106 to 109 V. When the voltage becomes great enough to overcome the
electrical resistance of the air between the clouds and the ground or an object on
it, current flows in the form of a lightning flash. Thus, the probability of a building
being struck by lightning depends not only on the frequency of occurrence of
thunderstorms but also on building height relative to nearby objects and the intensity
of cloud charges.
    Destruction at the earth’s surface may result not only at points hit by lightning
directly but also by electrostatic induction at points several feet away. Also, light-
ning striking a tall object may flash to a nearby object that offers a suitable path
to the ground.
    Lightning often shatters nonconductors or sets them on fire if they are combus-
tible. Conductors struck may melt. Living things may be burned or electrocuted.
Also, lightning may induce overvoltages in electrical power lines, sending electrical
charges along the lines in both directions from the stricken point to ground. Direct-
stroke overvoltages may range up to several million volts and several hundred
thousand amperes. Induced strokes, which occur more frequently, may be on the
order of several hundred thousand volts with currents up to 2000 A. Such over-
voltages may damage not only electric equipment connected to the power lines but
also buildings served by them. Consequently, lightning protection is necessary for
outdoor conductors as well as for buildings.


3.6.2   Methods for Protecting against Lightning

Objectives of lightning protection are life safety, prevention of property damage,
and maintenance of essential services, such as electrical and communication sys-
tems. Lightning protection usually requires installation of electrical conductors that
extend from points above the roof of a building to the ground, for the purpose of
conducting to the ground lightning that would otherwise strike the building. Such
an installation, however, possesses the potential hazard that, if not done properly,
lightning may flash from the lightning conductors to other building components.
Hence, the system must ensure that the lightning discharge is diverted away from
the building and its contents. Lightning protection systems should conform to the
standards of the American National Standards Institute, National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA 78, ‘‘Lightning Protection Code’’) and Underwriters Labora-
tories (UL 96A, ‘‘Master Labeled Lightning-Protection Systems’’).
3.50                                 SECTION THREE


    The key element in diverting lightning away from a building is an air terminal
or lightning rod, a conductor that projects into the air at least 12 in above the roof.
Air terminals should be spaced at intervals not exceeding 25 ft. Alternatively, a
continuous wire conductor or a grid of such conductors may be placed along the
highest points of a roof. If the tallest object on a roof is a metal mast, it can act
as an air terminal. A metal roof also can serve as an air terminal, but only if all
joints are made electrically continuous by soldering, welding, or interlocking. Ar-
ranged to provide a cone of protection over the entire building, all the air terminals
should be connected by conductors to each other and, by the same or other con-
ductors, to the ground along at least two separated paths.
    For roof and down conductors, copper, copper-clad steel, galvanized steel or a
metal alloy that is as resistant to corrosion as copper may be used. (A solid copper
conductor should be at least 1⁄4 in in diameter.) Direct connections between dissim-
ilar metals should be avoided to prevent corrosion. Metal objects and non-current-
carrying components of electrical systems should be kept at least 6 ft away from
the lightning conductors or should be bonded to the nearest lightning conductor.
Sharp bends in the conductors are not desirable. If a 90⬚ bend must be used, the
conductor should be firmly anchored, because the high current in a lightning stroke
will tend to straighten the bend. If the conductor has a U bend, the high current
may induce an electric arc to leap across the loop while also exerting forces to
straighten out the bend.
    In steel-frame buildings, the steel frame can be used as a down conductor. In
such cases, the top of the frame should be electrically connected to air terminals
and the base should be electrically connected to grounding electrodes. Similarly,
the reinforcing steel of a reinforced concrete building can be used as down con-
ductors if the reinforcing steel is bonded together from foundations to roof.
    Damage to the electrical systems of buildings can be limited or prevented by
insertion of lightning arresters, safety valves that curtail overvoltages and bypass
thc current surge to a ground system, at the service entrance. Further protection
can be afforded electrical equipment, especially sensitive electronic devices, by
installing surge protectors, or spark gaps, near the equipment.
    The final and equally important elements of a lightning-protection system are
grounding electrodes and the earth itself. The type and dimensions of the grounds,
or grounding electrodes, depends on the electrical resistance, or resistivity, of the
earth, which can be measured by technicians equipped with suitable instruments.
The objective of the grounding installation, which should be electrically bonded to
the down conductors, should be an earth-system resistance of 10 ⍀ or less. Under-
ground water pipes can serve as grounds if they are available. If not, long metal
rods can be driven into the ground to serve as electrodes. Where earth resistivity
is poor, an extensive system of buried wires may be required.
    (J. L. Marshall, ‘‘Lightning Protection,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.)



3.7    PROTECTION AGAINST INTRUDERS

Prevention of illegal entry into buildings by professional criminals determined to
break in is not practical. Hence, the prime objective of security measures is to make
illegal entry difficult. If this is done, it will take an intruder longer to gain entry or
will compel the intruder to make noise, thus increasing the chances of detection
and apprehension. Other objectives of security measures are detection of break-in
                           PROTECTION AGAINST HAZARDS                             3.51


attempts and intruders, alarming intruders so that they leave the premises before
they cause a loss or injury, and alerting building occupants and the police of the
break-in attempt. Also, an objective is to safeguard valuable assets by placing them
in a guarded, locked, secure enclosure with access limited only to approved per-
sonnel.
    Some communities have established ordinances setting minimum requirements
for security and incorporated them in the building code. (Communities that have
done this include Los Angeles, Oakland, and Concord in California; Indianapolis,
Ind.; Trenton, N.J.; Arlington Heights, Ill.; Arlington County, Va.; and Prince
George’s County, Md.) Provisions of these codes cover security measures for doors
and windows and associated hardware, accessible transoms, roof openings, safes,
lighting of parking lots, and intrusion-detection devices. For buildings requiring
unusual security measures, owners and designers should obtain the advice of a
security expert.


3.7.1   Security Measures

Basic security for a building is provided by commonly used walls and roofs with
openings protected by doors with key-operated locks or windows with latches. The
degree of protection required for a building and its occupants beyond basic security
and privacy needs depends on the costs of insurance and security measures relative
to potential losses from burglary and vandalism.
    For a small building not housing small items of great value (these can be placed
in a safety deposit box in a bank), devices for detecting break-in attempts are
generally the most practical means for augmenting basic security. Bells, buzzers,
or sirens should be installed to sound an alarm and automatic telephone or wireless
dialer should be used to alert a monitoring service to notify the police when an
intruder tries to enter the locked building or a security area.
    For a large building or a building requiring tight security, defense should be
provided in depth. Depending on the value of assets to be protected, protection
should start at the boundary of the property, with fences, gates, controlled access,
guard patrols, exterior illumination, alarms, or remote surveillance by closed-circuit
television. This defense should be backed up by similar measures at the perimeter
of the building and by security locks and latches on doors and windows. Openings
other than doorways or windows should be barred or made too small for human
entry and screened. Within the building, valuables should be housed in locked
rooms or a thick, steel safe, with controlled access to those areas.
    For most types of occupancy, control at the entrance often may be provided by
a receptionist who records names of visitors and persons visited, notifies the latter
and can advise the police of disturbances. When necessary, the receptionist can be
augmented by a guard at the control point or in a security center and, in very large
or high-rise buildings, by a roving guard available for emergencies. If a large se-
curity force is needed, facilities should be provided in the building for an office for
the security administrator and staff, photographic identification, and squad room
and lockers—all in or adjoining a security center.


3.7.2   Security Center

The security center may be equipped with or connected to electronic devices that
do the following:
3.52                              SECTION THREE


1. Detect a break-in attempt and sound an alarm.
2. Identify the point of intrusion.
3. Turn on lights.
4. Display the intruder on closed-circuit television and record observations on
   videotape.
5. Notify the police.
6. Limit entry to specific spaces only to approved personnel and only at permitted
   times.
7. Change locks automatically.
In addition, the center may be provided with emergency reporting systems, security
guard tour reporting systems, fire detection and protection systems, including su-
pervision of automatic fire sprinklers, HVAC controls, and supervision of other life
safety measures. See also Art. 3.5.12.
   (P. S. Hopf, ‘‘Handbook of Building Security Planning and Design,’’ McGraw-
Hill Publishing Company, New York.)
                       SECTION FOUR
             BUILDING MATERIALS
                                 David J. Akers
                       Civil Engineer, San Diego, California




This section describes the basic materials used in building construction and dis-
cusses their common applications. As the world’s population increases and con-
sumes more of the natural resources, it is incumbent upon the civil engineer to use
building materials that contribute to sustaining development instead of satisfying
only the short-term need. Material selection should incorporate an evaluation of the
amount of energy required to produce and deliver the material to the building site.
This concept of ‘‘embodied energy’’ is evolving and variable. As an example, in
the Pacific Northwest lumber would have an ‘‘embodied energy’’ of 1, but in the
arid Southwest transportation raises the value several points. Examples of other
materials are concrete (2–3), steel (4–6), and aluminum (80). For discussion pur-
poses, materials used in similar applications are grouped and discussed in sequence,
for example, masonry materials, wood, metals, plastics, etc.



CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS

Cementitious materials include the many products that are mixed with either water
or some other liquid or both to form a cementing paste that may be formed or
molded while plastic but will set into a rigid shape. When sand is added to the
paste, mortar is formed. A combination of coarse and fine aggregate (sand) added
to the paste forms concrete.



4.1   TYPES OF CEMENTITIOUS MATERIALS

There are many varieties of cements and numerous ways of classification. One of
the simplest classifications is by the chemical constituent that is responsible for the
setting or hardening of the cement. On this basis, the silicate and aluminate cements,
wherein the setting agents are calcium silicates and aluminates, constitute the most
important group of modern cements. Included in this group are the portland, alu-
minous, and natural cements.
                                         4.1
4.2                                 SECTION FOUR


    Limes, wherein the hardening is due to the conversion of hydroxides to carbon-
ates, were formerly widely used as the sole cementitious material, but their slow
setting and hardening are not compatible with modern requirements. Hence, their
principal function today is to plasticize the otherwise harsh cements and add resil-
ience to mortars and stuccoes. Use of limes is beneficial in that their slow setting
promotes healing, the recementing of hairline cracks.
    Another class of cements is composed of calcined gypsum and its related prod-
ucts. The gypsum cements are widely used in interior plaster and for fabrication of
boards and blocks; but the solubility of gypsum prevents its use in construction
exposed to any but extremely dry climates.
    Oxychloride cements constitute a class of specialty cements of unusual proper-
ties. Their cost prohibits their general use in competition with the cheaper cements;
but for special uses, such as the production of sparkproof floors, they cannot be
equaled.
    Masonry cements or mortar cements are widely used because of their conven-
ience. While they are, in general, mixtures of one of more of the above-mentioned
cements with some admixtures, they deserve special consideration because of their
economies.
    Other cementitious materials, such as polymers, fly ash, and silica fume, may
be used as a cement replacement in concrete. Polymers are plastics with long-chain
molecules. Concretes made with them have many qualities much superior to those
of ordinary concrete.
    Silica fume, also known as microsilica, is a waste product of electric-arc fur-
naces. The silica reacts with limes in concrete to form a cementitious material. A
fume particle has a diameter only 1% of that of a cement particle.



4.2   PORTLAND CEMENTS

Portland cement, the most common of the modern cements, is made by carefully
blending selected raw materials to produce a finished material meeting the require-
ments of ASTM C150 for one of eight specific cement types. Four major com-
pounds [lime (CaO), iron (Fe2O3), silica (SiO2), and alumina (Al2O3)] and two
minor compounds [gypsum (CaSO4 䡠 2H2O) and magnesia (MgO)] constitute the
raw materials. The calcareous (CaO) materials typically come from limestone, cal-
cite, marl, or shale. The argillaceous (SiO2 and Al2O3) materials are derived from
clay, shale, and sand. The materials used for the manufacture of any specific cement
are dependent on the manufacturing plant’s location and availability of raw mate-
rials. Portland cement can be made of a wide variety of industrial by-products.
    In the manufacture of cement, the raw materials are first mined and then ground
to a powder before blending in predetermined proportions. The blend is fed into
the upper end of a rotary kiln heated to 2600 to 3000⬚F by burning oil, gas, or
powdered coal. Because cement production is an energy-intensive process, reheaters
and the use of alternative fuel sources, such as old tires, are used to reduce the fuel
cost. (Burning tires provide heat to produce the clinker and the steel belts provide
the iron constituent.) Exposure to the elevated temperature chemically fuses the raw
materials together into hard nodules called cement clinker. After cooling, the clinker
is passed through a ball mill and ground to a fineness where essentially all of it
will pass a No. 200 sieve (75 ␮m). During the grinding, gypsum is added in small
amounts to control the temperature and regulate the cement setting time. The ma-
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                 4.3


terial that exits the ball mill is portland cement. It is normally sold in bags con-
taining 94 lb of cement.
    Concrete, the most common use for portland cement, is a complex material
consisting of portland cement, aggregates, water, and possibly chemical and mineral
admixtures. Only rarely is portland cement used alone, such as for a cement slurry
for filling well holes or for a fine grout. Therefore, it is important to examine the
relationship between the various portland cement properties and their potential ef-
fect upon the finished concrete. Portland cement concrete is generally selected for
structural use because of its strength and durability. Strength is easily measured and
can be used as a general directly proportional indicator of overall durability. Specific
durability cannot be easily measured but can be specified by controlling the cement
chemistry and aggregate properties.


4.2.1   Specifications for Portland Cements

ASTM C150 defines requirements for eight types of portland cement. The pertinent
chemical and physical properties are shown in Table 4.1. The chemical composition
of portland cement is expressed in a cement-chemistry shorthand based on four
phase compounds: tricalcium silicate (C3S), dicalcium silicate (C2S), tricalcium alu-
minate (C3A), and tetracalcium aluminum ferrite (C4AF). C2S and C3S are termed
the calcium silicate hydrates (CSH).
    Most cements will exceed the requirements shown in Table 4.1 by a comfortable
margin. Note that the required compressive strengths are minimums. Almost with-
out exception, every portland cement will readily exceed these minimum values.
However, a caution must be attached to compressive strengths that significantly
exceed the minimum values. While there is not a one-to-one correlation between a
cement cube strength and the strength of concrete made with that cement (5000-
psi cement does not equate to 5000-psi concrete), variations in cube strengths will
be reflected in the tested concrete strength. It is imperative that, as the designed
concrete strength reaches 5000 psi and greater, the cement cube strength be rigor-
ously monitored. Any lowering of the running average will have a negative effect
on the strength of concrete if the concrete mix design is not altered.
    The basic types of portland cement covered by ASTM C150 are as follows:
    Type I, general-purpose cement, is the one commonly used for many structural
purposes. Chemical requirements for this type of cement are limited to magnesia
and sulfur-trioxide contents and loss on ignition, since the cement is adequately
defined by its physical characteristics.
    Type II is a modified cement for use in general concrete where a moderate
exposure to sulfate attack may be anticipated or where a moderate heat of hydration
is required. These characteristics are attained by placing limitations on the C3S and
C3A content of the cement. Type II cement gains strength a little more slowly than
Type I but ultimately will achieve equal strength. It is generally available in most
sections of the country and is preferred by some engineers over Type I for general
construction. Type II cement may also be specified as a low-alkali cement for use
where alkali reactive aggregates are present. To do so requires that optional chem-
ical requirements (Table 4.2) be included in the purchase order. Type II low-alkali
cement is commonly specified in California.
    Type III cement attains high early strength. In 7 days, strength of concrete made
with it is practically equal to that made with Type I or Type II cement at 28 days.
This high early strength is attained by finer grinding (although no minimum is
placed on the fineness by specification) and by increasing the C3S and C3A content
4.4                                       SECTION FOUR


TABLE 4.1 Chemical and Physical Requirements for Portland Cement*

               Type:                    I and IA    II and IIA    III and IIIA     IV           V
               Name:                    General-                      High        Low-      Sulfate-
                                         purpose     Modified         early       heat      resisting
C3S, max %                                                                          35
C2S, min %                                                                          40
C3A, max %                                                8            15            7          5
SiO2, min %                                              20
Al2O3, max %                                              6
Fe2O3, max %                                              6                          6.5
MgO, max %                                   6            6              6           6          6
SO3, max %:
  When C3A ⱕ 8%                              3            3              3.5         2.3        2.3
  When C3A ⬎ 8%                              3.5                         4.5
C4AF ⫹ 2(C3A), max %                                                                           25
Fineness, specific surface, m2 / kg        160         160                         160        160
  Average min, by turbidimeter
  Average min, by air                      280         280                         280        280
  permeability test
Compressive strength, psi, mortar
  cubes of 1 part cement and 2.75
  parts graded standard sand after:
  1 day min                                                          1800
     Standard
     Air-entraining                                                  1450
  3 days min                             1800         1500           3500                   1200
     Standard
     Air-entraining                      1450         1200           2800
  7 days min                             2800         2500                        1000      2200
     Standard
     Air-entraining                      2250         2000
  28 days min                                                                     2500      3000
     Standard
    * Based on requirements in ‘‘Standard Specification for Portland Cement,’’ ASTM C150. See current
edition of C150 for exceptions, alternatives, and changes in requirements.




of the cement. Type III cement, however, has high heat evolution and therefore
should not be used in large masses. Because of the higher C3A content, Type III
cement also has poor sulfate resistance. Type III cement is not always available
from building materials dealers’ stocks but may be obtained by them from the
cement manufacturer on short notice. Ready-mix concrete suppliers generally do
not stock Type III cement because its shorter set time makes it more volatile to
transport and discharge, especially in hot weather.
    Type IV is a low-heat cement that has been developed for mass concrete con-
struction. Normal Type I cement, if used in large masses that cannot lose heat by
radiation, will liberate enough heat during the hydration of the cement to raise the
temperature of the concrete as much as 50 or 60⬚F. This results in a relatively large
increase in dimensions while the concrete is still soft and plastic. Later, as the
concrete cools are hardening, shrinkage causes cracks to develop, weakening the
                                       BUILDING MATERIALS                                             4.5


TABLE 4.2 Optional Chemical Requirements for Portland Cement*

                                                  I and       II and       III and
               Cement type                          IA          IIA          IIIA         IV          V
Tricalcium aluminate (C3A), max %
  For moderate sulfate resistance                                            8
  For high sulfate resistance                                                5
Sum of tricalcium silicate and                                 58
  tricalcium aluminate, max %†
Alkalies (Na2O ⫹ 0.658K2O), max %‡                 0.60         0.60         0.60        0.60        0.60
    * These optional requirements apply only if specifically requested. Availability should be verified.
    † For use when moderate heat of hydration is required.
    ‡ Low-alkali cement. This limit may be specified when cement is to be used in concrete with aggregates
that may be deleteriously reactive. See ‘‘Standard Specification for Concrete Aggregates,’’ ASTM C33.



concrete and affording points of attack for aggressive solutions. The potential-phase
compounds that make the largest contribution to the heat of hydration are C3S and
C3A; so the amounts of these are permitted to be present are limited. Since these
compounds also produce the early strength of cement, the limitation results in a
cement that gains strength relatively slowly. This is of little importance, however,
in the mass concrete for which this type of cement is designed.
   Type V is a portland cement intended for use when high sulfate resistance is
required. Its resistance to sulfate attack is attained through the limitation on the
C3A content. It is particularly suitable for structures subject to attack by liquors
containing sulfates, such as liquids in wastewater treatment plants, seawaters, and
some other natural waters.
   Both Type IV and Type V cements are specialty cements. They are not normally
available from dealer’s stock but are usually obtainable for use on a large job if
arrangements are made with the cement manufacturer in advance.


4.2.2    Air-Entraining Portland Cements

For use in the manufacturer of air-entraining concrete, agents may be added to the
cement by the manufacturer, thereby producing air-entraining portland cements
(‘‘Air-Entraining Additions for Use in the Manufacture of Air-Entraining Portland
Cement,’’ ASTM C226). These cements are available as Types IA, IIA, and IIIA.


4.3     ALUMINOUS CEMENTS

These are prepared by fusing a mixture of aluminous and calcareous materials
(usually bauxite and limestone) and grinding the resultant product to a fine powder.
These cements are characterized by their rapid-hardening properties and the high
strength developed at early ages. Table 4.3 shows the relative strengths of 4-in
cubes of 1:2:4 concrete made with normal portland, high-early-strength portland,
and aluminous cements.
    Since a large amount of heat is liberated with rapidly by aluminous cement
during hydration, care must be taken not to use the cement in places where this
4.6                                   SECTION FOUR


            TABLE 4.3 Relative Strengths of Concrete Made from Portland
            and Aluminous Cements*

                                      Compressive strength, psi
            Days      Normal portland       High-early portland       Aluminous
              1              460                     790                 5710
              3             1640                    2260                 7330
              7             2680                    3300                 7670
             28             4150                    4920                 8520
             56             4570                    5410                 8950
               * Adapted from F. M. Lea, ‘‘Chemistry of Cement and Concrete,’’ St.
            Martin’s Press, Inc., New York.



heat cannot be dissipated. It is usually not desirable to place aluminous-cement
concretes in lifts of over 12 in; otherwise the temperature rise may cause serious
weakening of the concrete.
   Aluminous cements are much more resistant to the action of sulfate waters than
are portland cements. They also appear to be much more resistant to attack by
water containing aggressive carbon dioxide or weak mineral acids than the silicate
cements. Their principal use is in concretes where advantage may be taken of their
very high early strength or of their sulfate resistance, and where the extra cost of
the cement is not an important factor.
   Another use of aluminous cements is in combination with firebrick to make
refractory concrete. As temperatures are increased, dehydration of the hydration
products occurs. Ultimately, these compounds create a ceramic bond with the ag-
gregates.



4.4   NATURAL CEMENTS

Natural cements are formed by calcining a naturally occurring mixture of calcareous
and argillaceous substances at a temperature below that at which sintering takes
place. The ‘‘Specification for Natural Cement,’’ ASTM C10, requires that the tem-
perature be no higher than necessary to drive off the carbonic acid gas. Since natural
cements are derived from naturally occurring materials and no particular effort is
made to adjust the composition, both the composition and properties vary rather
widely. Some natural cements may be almost the equivalent of portland cement in
properties; others are much weaker. Natural cements are principally used in ma-
sonry mortars and as an admixture in portland-cement concretes.



4.5   LIMES

These are made principally of calcium oxide (CaO), occurring naturally in lime-
stone, marble, chalk, coral, and shell. For building purposes, they are used chiefly
in mortars.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.7


4.5.1   Hydraulic Limes

These are made by calcining a limestone containing silica and alumina to a tem-
perature short of incipient fusion so as to form sufficient free lime to permit hy-
dration and at the same time leave unhydrated sufficient calcium silicates to give
the dry powder its hydraulic properties (see ‘‘Specification for Hydraulic Hydrated
Lime for Structural Purposes,’’ ASTM C141).
   Because of the low silicate and high lime contents, hydraulic limes are relatively
weak. They find their principal use in masonry mortars. A hydraulic lime with more
than 10% silica will set under water.


4.5.2   Quicklimes

When limestone is heated to a temperature in excess of 1700⬚F, the carbon dioxide
content is driven off and the remaining solid product is quicklime. It consists es-
sentially of calcium and magnesium oxides plus impurities such as silica, iron, and
aluminum oxides. The impurities are usually limited to less than 5%. If they exceed
10%, the product may be a hydraulic lime.
    Two classes of quicklime are recognized, high-calcium and dolomitic. A high-
calcium quicklime usually contains less than 5% magnesium oxide. A dolomitic
quicklime usually contains from 35 to 40% magnesium oxide. A few quicklimes
are found that contain 5 to 35% magnesium oxide and are called magnesian limes.
    The outstanding characteristic of quicklime is its ability to slake with water.
When quicklime is mixed with from two to three times its weight of water, a
chemical reaction takes place. The calcium oxide combines with water to form
calcium hydroxide, and sufficient heat is evolved to bring the entire mass to a boil.
The resulting product is a suspension of finely divided calcium hydroxide (and
magnesium hydroxide or oxide if dolomitic lime is used) in water. On cooling, the
semifluid mass stiffens to a putty of such consistency that it may be shoveled or
carried in a hod. This slaked quicklime putty, when cooled and preferably screened,
is the material used in construction. Quicklime should always be thoroughly slaked.
    The yield of putty will vary, depending on the type of quicklime, its degree of
burning, and slaking conditions, and will usually be from 70 to 100 ft3 of putty per
ton of quicklime. The principal use of the putty is in masonry mortars, where it is
particularly valuable because of the high degree of plasticity or workability it im-
parts to the mortar. It is used at times as an admixture in concrete to improve
workability. It also is used in some localities as finish-coat plaster where full ad-
vantage may be taken of its high plasticity.


4.5.3   Mason’s Hydrated Lime

Hydrated limes are prepared from quicklimes by addition of a limited amount of
water. After hydration ceases to evolve heat, the resulting product is a fine, dry
powder. It is then classified by air-classification methods to remove undesirable
oversize particles and packaged in 50-lb sacks. It is always a factory-made product,
whereas quicklime putty is almost always a job-slaked product.
   Mason’s hydrated limes are those hydrates suitable for use in mortars, base-coat
plasters, and concrete. They necessarily follow the composition of the quicklime.
High-calcium hydrates are composed primarily of calcium hydroxide. Normal dol-
omitic hydrates are composed of calcium hydroxide plus magnesium oxide.
4.8                                 SECTION FOUR


    Plasticity of mortars made from normal mason’s hydrated limes (Type N) is fair.
It is better than that attained with most cements, but not nearly so high as that of
mortars made with an equivalent amount of slaked putty.
    The normal process of hydration of a dolomitic quicklime at atmospheric pres-
sure results in the hydration of the calcium fraction only, leaving the magnesium-
oxide portion substantially unchanged chemically. When dolomitic quicklime is
hydrated under pressure, the magnesium oxide is converted to magnesium hydrox-
ide. This results in the so-called special hydrates (Type S), which not only have
their magnesia contents substantially completely hydrated but also have a high
degree of plasticity immediately on wetting with water. Mortars made from Type
S hydrates are more workable than those made from Type N hydrates. In fact, Type
S hydrates are nearly as workable as those made from slaked quicklime putties.
The user of this type of hydrate may therefore have the convenience of a bagged
product and a high degree of workability without having the trouble and possible
hazard of slaking quicklime.


4.5.4   Finishing Hydrated Limes

Finishing hydrated limes are particularly suitable for use in the finishing coat of
plaster. They are characterized by a high degree of whiteness and plasticity. Prac-
tically all finishing hydrated limes are produced in the Toledo district of Ohio from
dolomitic limestone. The normal hydrate is composed of calcium hydroxide and
magnesium oxide. When first wetted, it is no more plastic than Type N mason’s
hydrates. It differs from the latter, however, in that, on soaking overnight, the fin-
ishing hydrated lime develops a very high degree of plasticity, whereas the mason’s
hydrate shows relatively little improvements in plasticity on soaking.



4.6     LOW-TEMPERATURE GYPSUM DERIVATIVES

When gypsum rock (CaSO4 䡠 2H2O) is heated to a relatively low temperature, about
130⬚C, three-fourths of the water of crystallization is driven off. The resulting prod-
uct is known by various names such as hemihydrate, calcined gypsum, and first-
settle stucco. Its common name, however, is plaster of paris. It is a fine powder,
usually white. While it will set under water, it does not gain strength and ultimately,
on continued water exposure, will disintegrate.
   Plaster of paris, with set retarded or unretarded, is used as a molding plaster or
as a gaging plaster. The molding plaster is used for preparing ornamental plaster
objects. The gaging plaster is used for finishing hydrated lime to form the smooth
white-coat finish on plaster walls. The unretarded plaster of paris is used by man-
ufacturers to make gypsum block, tile, and gypsumboard (wallboard, lath, backer-
board, coreboard, etc.).
   When plaster of paris is retarded and mixed with fiber such as sisal, it is mar-
keted under the name of hardwall plaster or cement plaster. (The latter name is
misleading, since it does not contain any portland cement.) Hardwall plaster, mixed
with water and with from two to three parts of sand by weight, is widely used for
base-coat plastering. In some cases wood fiber is used in place of sand, making a
‘‘wood-fibered’’ plaster.
   Special effects are obtained by combining hardwall plaster with the correct type
of aggregate. With perlite or vermiculite aggregate, a lightweight plaster is obtained.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                                 4.9


    Gypsum plasters, in general, have a strong set, gain their full strength when dry,
do not have abnormal volume changes, and have excellent fire-resistance charac-
teristics. They are not well adapted, however, for use under continued damp con-
ditions or intermittent wet conditions. See also Arts. 4.26 to 4.30.



4.7   OXYCHLORIDE CEMENTS

Lightly calcined magnesium oxide mixed with a solution of magnesium chloride
forms a cement known as magnesium oxychloride cement, or Sorel cement. It is
particularly useful in making flooring compositions in which it is mixed with col-
ored aggregates. Floors made of oxychloride cement are sparkproof and are more
resilient than floors of concrete.
   Oxychloride cement has very strong bonding power and, because of its higher
bonding power, may be used with greater quantities of aggregate than are possible
with portland cement. Oxychloride cement also bonds well with wood and is used
in making partition block or tile with wood shavings or sawdust as aggregate. It is
moderately resistant to water but should not be used under continually wet condi-
tions.



4.8   MASONRY CEMENTS

Masonry cements, or—as they are sometimes called—mortar cements, are intended
to be mixed with sand and used for setting unit masonry, such as brick, tile, and
stone. They may be any one of the hydraulic cements already discussed or mixtures
of them in any proportion.
   Many commercial masonry cements are mixtures of portland cement and pul-
verized limestone, often containing as much as 50 or 60% limestone. They are sold
in bags containing from 70 to 80 lb, each bag nominally containing a cubic foot.
Price per bag is commonly less than of portland cement, but because of the use of
the lighter bag, cost per ton is higher than that of portland cement.
   Since there are no limits on chemical content and physical requirements, ma-
sonry cement specifications are quite liberal. Some manufacturers vary the com-
position widely, depending on competition, weather conditions, or availability of
materials. Resulting mortars may vary widely in properties.



4.9   FLY ASHES

Fly ash meeting the requirements of ASTM C618, ‘‘Specification for Fly Ash and
Raw or Calcined Natural Pozzolan for Use as a Mineral Admixture in Portland
Cement Concrete,’’ is generally used as a cementitious material as well as an ad-
mixture.
    Natural pozzolans are derived from some diatomaceous earths, opaline cherts
and shales, and other materials. While part of a common ASTM designation with
fly ash, they are not as readily available as fly ashes and thus do not generate the
same level of interest or research.
4.10                                SECTION FOUR


    Fly ashes are produced by coal combustion, generally in an electrical generating
station. The ash that would normally be released through the chimney is captured
by various means, such as electrostatic precipitators. The fly ash may be sized prior
to shipment to concrete suppliers.
    All fly ashes possess pozzolanic properties, the ability to react with calcium
hydroxide at ordinary temperatures to form compounds with cementitious proper-
ties. When cement is mixed with water, a chemical reaction (hydration) occurs.
The product of this reaction is calcium silicate hydrate (CSH) and calcium hydrox-
ide [Ca(OH)2]. Fly ashes have high percentages of silicon dioxide (SiO2). In the
presence of moisture, the Ca(OH)2 will react with the SiO2 to form another CSH.
    Type F ashes are the result of burning anthracite or bituminous coals and possess
pozzolanic properties. They have been shown by research and practice to provide
usually increased sulfate resistance and to reduce alkali-aggregate expansions. Type
C fly ashes result from burning lignite or subbituminous coals. Because of the
chemical properties of the coal, the Type C fly ashes have some cementitious prop-
erties in addition to their pozzolanic properties. Type C fly ashes may reduce the
durability of concretes into which they are incorporated.



4.10   SILICA FUME (MICROSILICA)

Silica fume, or microsilica, is a condensed gas, the by-product of metallic silicon
or ferrosilicon alloys produced by electric arc furnaces. (While both terms are cor-
rect, microsilica (MS) is a less confusing name.) The Canadian standard CAN /
CSA-A23.5-M86, ‘‘Supplementary Cementing Materials,’’ limits amorphous SiO2
to a maximum of 85% and oversize to 10%. Many MS contain more than 90%
SiO2.
    MS has an average diameter of 0.1 to 0.2 ␮m, a particle size of about 1% that
of portland cement. Because of this small size, it is not possible to utilize MS in
its raw form. Manufacturers supply it either densified, in a slurry (with or without
water-reducing admixtures), or pelletized. Either the densified or slurried MS can
be utilized in concrete. The pelletized materials is densified to the point that it will
not break down during mixing.
    Because of its extremely small size, MS imparts several useful properties to
concrete. It greatly increases long-term strength. It very efficiently reacts with the
Ca(OH)2 and creates a beneficial material in place of a waste product. MS is gen-
erally used in concrete with a design strength in excess of 12,000 psi. It provides
increased sulfate resistance to concrete, and it significantly reduces the permeability
of concrete. Also, its small size allows MS to physically plug microcracks and tiny
openings.



AGGREGATES

Aggregate is a broad encompassing boulders, cobbles, crushed stone, gravel, air-
cooled blast furnace slag, native and manufactured sands, and manufactured and
natural lightweight aggregates. Aggregates may be further described by their re-
spective sizes.
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                 4.11


4.11     NORMAL-WEIGHT AGGREGATES

These typically have specific gravities between 2.0 and 3.0. They are usually dis-
tinguished by size as follows:

Boulders              Larger than 6 in
Cobbles               6 to 3 in
Coarse aggregate      3 in to No. 4 sieve
Fine aggregate        No. 4 sieve to No. 200 sieve
Mineral filler        Material passing No. 200 sieve

Used in most concrete construction, normal-weight aggregates are obtained by
draining riverbeds or mining and crunching formational material. Concrete made
with normal-weight fine and coarse aggregates generally weights about 144 lb / ft3.
   Boulders and cobbles are generally not used in their as-mined size but are
crushed to make various sizes of coarse aggregate and manufactured sand and
mineral filler. Gravels and naturally occurring sand are produced by the action of
water and weathering on glacial and river deposits. These materials have round,
smooth surfaces and particle-size distributions that require minimal processing.
These materials can be supplied in either coarse or fine-aggregate sizes.
   Fine aggregates have 100% of their material passing the 3⁄8-in sieve. Coarse
aggregates have the bulk of the material retained on the No. 4 sieve.
   Aggregates comprise the greatest volume percentage in portland-cement con-
crete, mortar, or asphaltic concrete. In a portland-cement concrete mix, the coarse
and fine aggregates occupy about 60 to 75% of the total mix volume. For asphaltic
concrete, the aggregates represent 75 to 85% of the mix volume. Consequentially,
the aggregates are not inert filler materials. The individual aggregate properties have
demonstrable effects on the service life and durability of the material system in
which the aggregate is used, such as portland-cement concrete, asphaltic concrete,
mortar, or aggregate base.
   The acceptability of a coarse or fine aggregate for use in concrete or mortar is
judged by many properties including gradation, amount of fine material passing the
No. 200 sieve, hardness, soundness, particle shape, volume stability, potential alkali
reactivity, resistance to freezing and thawing, and organic impurities. For aggregates
used in general building construction, property limits are provided in ASTM C33,
‘‘Specification for Concrete Aggregates,’’ C637, ‘‘Specification for Aggregates for
Radiation-Shielding Concrete,’’ and C330, ‘‘Specification for Lightweight Aggre-
gates for Structural Concrete.’’ For other types of construction, such as highways
and airports, standards written by various trade or governmental organizations are
available.


4.11.1   Gradation of Aggregates

The distribution of aggregate sizes in a concrete mix is important because it directly
influences the amount of cement required for a given strength, workability of the
mix (and amount of effort to place the mix in the forms), in-place durability, and
overall economy. ASTM C33 provides ranges of fine- and coarse-aggregate grading
limits. The latter are listed from Size 1 (31⁄2 to 11⁄2 in) to Size 8 (3⁄8 to No. 8). The
4.12                               SECTION FOUR


National Stone Association specifies a gradation for manufactured sand that differs
from that for fine aggregate in C33 principally for the No. 100 and 200 sieves. The
NSA gradation is noticeably finer (greater percentages passing each sieve). The fine
materials, composed of angular particles, are rock fines, as opposed to silts and
clays in natural sand, and contribute to concrete workability.
   The various gradations provide standard sizes for aggregate production and
quality-control testing. They are conducive to production of concrete with accept-
able properties. Caution should be exercised, however, when standard individual
grading limits are used. If the number of aggregate sizes are limited or there is not
sufficient overlap between aggregates sizes, an acceptable or economical concrete
may not be attainable with acceptably graded aggregates. The reason for this is that
the combined gradation is gap graded. The ideal situation is a dense or well-graded
size distribution that optimizes the void content of the combined aggregates (Art.
4.17). It is possible, however, to produce acceptable concrete with individual ag-
gregates that do not comply with the standard limits but that can be combined to
produce a dense gradation.


4.11.2   Amount of Fine Material Passing the No. 200 Sieve

The material passing the No. 200 sieve is clay, silt, or a combination of the two.
It increases the water demand of the aggregate. Large amounts of materials smaller
than No. 200 may also indicate the presence of clay coatings on the coarse aggre-
gate that would decrease bond of the aggregate to the cement matrix. A test method
is given in ASTM C117, ‘‘Materials Finer than 75 ␮m Sieve in Mineral Aggregates
by Washing.’’


4.11.3   Hardness

Coarse-aggregate hardness is measured by the Los Angeles Abrasion Test, ASTM
C131 or C595. These tests break the aggregate down by impacting it with steel
balls in a steel tumbler. The resulting breakdown is not directly related to the
abrasion an aggregate receives in service, but the results can be empirically related
to concretes exhibiting service lives.


4.11.4   Soundness

Aggregate soundness is measured by ASTM C88, ‘‘Test Method for Soundness of
Aggregates by Use of Sodium Sulfate or Magneisum Sulfate.’’ This test measures
the amount of aggregate degradation when exposed to alternating cycles of wetting
and drying in a sulfate solution.


4.11.5   Particle Shape

Natural sand and gravel have a round, smooth particle shape. Crushed aggregate
(coarse and fine) may have shapes that are flat and elongated, angular, cubical, disk,
or rodlike. These shapes result from the crushing equipment employed and the
aggregate mineralogy. Extreme angularity and elongation increase the amount of
cement required to give strength, difficulty in finishing, and effort required to pump
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.13


the concrete. Flat and elongated particles also increase the amount of required
mixing water.
   The bond between angular particles is greater than that between smooth particles.
Properly graded angular particles can take advantage of this property and offset the
increase in water required to produce concrete with cement content and strength
equal to that of a smooth-stone mix.


4.11.6   Potential Alkali Reactivity

Aggregates that contain certain forms of silicas or carbonates may react with the
alkalies present in portland cement (sodium oxide and potassium oxide). The re-
action product cracks the concrete or may create pop-outs at the concrete surface.
The reaction is more pronounced when the concrete is in a warm, damp environ-
ment.
   Testing for potentially reactive aggregates is difficult, since the available tests
do not yield consistent answers. Tests for aggregate potential alkali reactivity can
be categorized as pre- or post-concrete and chemical or physical. Of the three pre-
concrete tests, one is chemical. The standard chemical test (ASTM C289) is a
screening test that should only be used for an initial aggregate screening. Experience
has shown the test will give false positive reactions of potentially reactive aggre-
gates. The old mortar bar test (ASTM C227) is very slow and may be too lenient.
The rapid immersion mortar bar test (ASTM C1260) is a harsher test but can
produce results in two weeks. Potential alkali reactivity can be determined in con-
crete by observation or using a uranal acetate ultraviolet light test procedure. Pet-
rographic analysis of aggregates and hardened concrete can be used to evaluate the
potential for alkali silica reactivity (ASR). Long-term field experience with available
aggregate sources is the best predictor of ASR.


4.11.7   Resistance to Freezing and Thawing

The pore structure, absorption, porosity, and permeability of aggregates are espe-
cially important if they are used to make concrete exposed to repeated cycles of
freezing and thawing. Aggregates that become critically saturated and then freeze
cannot accommodate the expansion of the frozen water. Empirical data show that
freeze-thaw deterioration is caused by the coarse aggregates and not the fine. A
method prescribed in ‘‘Test Method for Resistance of Concrete to Rapid Freezing
and Thawing,’’ ASTM C666, measures concrete performance by weight changes, a
reduction in the dynamic modulus of elasticity, and increases in sample length.


4.11.8   Impurities in Aggregates

Erratic setting times and rates of hardening may be caused by organic impurities
in the aggregates, primarily the sand. The presence of these impurities can be
investigated by a method given in ‘‘Test Method for Organic Impurities in Fine
Aggregates for Concrete,’’ ASTM C40.
   Pop-outs and reduced durability can be caused by soft particles, chert, clay
lumps and other friable particles, coal, lignite, or other lightweight materials in the
aggregates. Coal and lignite may also cause staining of exposed concrete surfaces.
4.14                               SECTION FOUR


4.11.9   Volume Stability

Volume stability refers to susceptibility of aggregate to expansion when heated or
to cyclic expansions and contractions when saturated and dried. Aggregates that are
susceptible to volume change due to moisture should be avoided.



4.12     HEAVYWEIGHT AND LIGHTWEIGHT
         AGGREGATES

Heavyweight aggregates include magnetite, with a specific gravity ␦ of 4.3; barite,
␦ ⫽ 4.2; limonite, ␦ ⫽ 3.8; ferrophosphorus, ␦ ⫽ 6.3; and steel shot or punchings,
␦ ⫽ 7.6. Such heavyweight aggregates may be used instead of gravel or crushed
stone to produce a dense concrete; for example, for shielding of nuclear reactors
as specified in ASTM C637.

Lightweight Aggregates. These can be divided into two categories: structural and
nonstructural. The structural lightweight aggregates are defined by ASTM C330
and C331. They are either manufactured (expanded clay, shale, or slate, or blast-
furnace slag) or natural (scoria and pumice). These aggregates produce concretes
generally in the strength range of 3000 to 4000 psi; higher strengths are attainable
and are discussed in Art. 4.17. The air-dry unit weight of normal strength light-
weight concrete (less than 5000 psi) ranges from 100 to 115 pcf. High-performance
lightweight concrete has unit weights in the range of 120 pcf.
   The common nonstructural lightweight aggregates (ASTM C332) are vermiculite
and perlite, although scoria and pumice can also be used. These materials are used
in insulating concretes for soundproofing and nonstructural floor toppings.
   Lightweight aggregates produce concrete with low thermal conductivities, which
equate to good fire protection. When concrete is exposed to extreme heat, the
moisture present within the concrete rapidly changes from a liquid to steam having
a volume of up to 15 times larger. The large number and large sizes of pores within
lightweight aggregates create pressure-relief regions.



ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE

Admixtures are anything other than portland cement, water, and aggregates that are
added to a concrete mix to modify its properties. Included in this definition are
chemical admixtures (ASTM C494 and C260), mineral admixtures such as fly ash
(C618) and silica fume, corrosion inhibitors, colors, fibers, and miscellaneous
(pumping aids, dampproofing, gas-forming, permeability-reducing agents).



4.13     CHEMICAL AND MINERAL ADMIXTURES

Chemical admixtures used in concrete generally serve as water reducers, acceler-
ators, set retarders, or a combination. ASTM C494, ‘‘Standard Specification for
Chemical Admixtures for Concrete,’’ contains the following classification:
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.15



                   Type                     Property
                    A       Water reducer
                    B       Set retarder
                    C       Set accelerator
                    D       Water reducer and set retarder
                    E       Water reducer and set accelerator
                    F       High-range water reducer
                    G       High-range water reducer and set retarder



High-range admixtures reduce the amount of water needed to produce a concrete
of a specific consistency by 12% or more.


4.13.1   Water-Reducing Admixtures

These decrease water requirements for a concrete mix by chemically reacting with
early hydration products to form a monomolecular layer of admixture at the cement-
water interface. This layer isolates individual particles of cement and reduces the
energy required to cause the mix to flow. Thus, the mix is ‘‘lubricated’’ and exposes
more cement particles for hydration.
    The Type A admixture allows the amount of mixing water to be reduced while
maintaining the same mix slump. Or at a constant water-cement ratio, this admixture
allows the cement content to be decreased without loss of strength. If the amount
of water is not reduced, slump of the mix will be increased and also strength will
be increased because more of the cement surface area will be exposed for hydration.
Similar effects occur for Type D and E admixtures. Typically, a reduction in mixing
water of 5 to 10% can be expected.
    Type F and G admixtures are used where there is a need for high-workability
concrete. A concrete without an admixture typically has a slump of 2 to 3 in. After
the admixture is added, the slump may be in the range of 8 to 10 in without
segregation of mix components. These admixtures are especially useful for mixes
with a low water-cement ratio. Their 12 to 30% reduction in water allows a cor-
responding reduction in cementitious material.
    The water-reducing admixtures are commonly manufactured from lignosulfonic
acids and their salts, hydroxylated carboxylic acids and their salts, or polymers of
derivatives of melamines or naphthalenes or sulfonated hydrocarbons. The combi-
nation of admixtures used in a concrete mix should be carefully evaluated and tested
to ensure that the desired properties are achieved. For example, depending on the
dosage of admixture and chemistry of the cement, it is possible that a retarding
admixture will accelerate the set. Note also that all normal-set admixtures will retard
the set if the dosage is excessive. Furthermore, because of differences in percentage
of solids between products from different companies, there is not always a direct
correspondence in dosage between admixtures of the same class. Therefore, it is
important to consider the chemical composition carefully when evaluating compet-
ing admixtures.
    Superplasticizers are high-range water-reducing admixtures that meet the re-
quirements of ASTM C494 Type F or G. They are often used to achieve high-
strength concrete by use of a low water-cement ratio with good workability and
low segregation. They also may be used to produce concrete of specified strengths
4.16                                SECTION FOUR


with less cement at constant water-cement ratio. And they may be used to produce
self-compacting, self-leveling flowing concretes, for such applications as long-
distance pumping of concrete from mixer to formwork or placing concrete in forms
congested with reinforcing steel. For these concretes, the cement content or water-
cement ratio is not reduced, but the slump is increased substantially without causing
segregation. For example, an initial slump of 3 to 4 in for an ordinary concrete mix
may be increased to 7 to 8 in without addition of water and decrease in strength.
   Superplasticizers may be classified as sulfonated melamine-formaldehyde con-
densates, sulfonated naphthaline-formaldehyde condensates, modified lignosulfon-
ates, or synthetic polymers.


4.13.2   Air-Entraining Admixtures

These create numerous microscopic air spaces within concrete to protect it from
degradation due to repeated freezing and thawing or exposure to aggressive chem-
icals. For concrete exposed to repeated cycles of freezing and thawing, the air gaps
provide room for expansion of external and internal water, which otherwise would
damage the concrete.
   Since air-entrained concrete bleeds to a lesser extent than non-air-entrained, there
are fewer capillaries extending from the concrete matrix to the surface. Therefore,
there are fewer avenues available for ingress of aggressive chemicals into the con-
crete.
   The ‘‘Standard Specification for Air-Entraining Admixtures for Concrete,’’
ASTM C260, covers materials for use of air-entraining admixtures to be added to
concrete in the field. Air entrainment may also be achieved by use of Types IIA
and IIIA portland cements (Art. 4.2.2).


4.13.3   Set-Accelerating Admixtures

These are used to decrease the time from the start of addition of water to cement
to initial set and to increase the rate of strength gain of concrete. The most com-
monly used set-accelerating admixture is calcium chloride. Its use, however, is
controversial in cases where reinforcing or prestressing steel is present. The reason
is that there is a possibility that the accelerator will introduce free chloride ions
into the concrete, thus contributing to corrosion of the steel. An alternative is use
of one of many admixtures not containing chloride that are available.


4.13.4   Retarding Admixtures

To some extent, all normal water-reducing admixtures retard the initial set of con-
crete. A Type B or D admixture will allow transport of concrete for a longer time
before initial set occurs. Final set also is delayed. Hence, precautions should be
taken if retarded concrete is to be used in walls.
    Depending on the dosage and type of base chemicals in the admixture, initial
set can be retarded for several hours to several days. A beneficial side effect of
retardation of initial and final sets is an increase in the compressive strength of the
concrete. A commonly used Type D admixture provides higher 7- and 28-day
strengths than a Type A when used in the same mix design.
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                 4.17


4.13.5   Mineral Admixtures

Fly ashes, pozzolans, and microsilicates are included in the mineral admixture clas-
sification (Arts. 4.9 and 4.10). Natural cement (Art. 4.4) is sometimes used as an
admixture.


4.13.6   Corrosion Inhibitors

Reinforcing steel in concrete usually is protected against corrosion by the high
alkalinity of the concrete, which creates a passivating layer at the steel surface.
This layer is composed of ferric oxide, a stable compound. Within and at the surface
of the ferric oxide, however, are ferrous-oxide compounds, which are more reactive.
When the ferrous-oxide compounds come into contact with aggressive substances,
such as chloride ions, they react with oxygen to form solid, iron-oxide corrosion
products. These produce a fourfold increase in volume and create an expansion
force greater than the concrete tensile strength. The result is deterioration of the
concrete.
    For corrosion to occur, chloride in the range of 1.0 to 1.5 lb / yd3 must be present.
If there is a possibility that chlorides may be introduced from outside the concrete
matrix, for example, by deicing salts, the concrete can be protected by lowering
the water-cement ratio, or increasing the amount of cover over the reinforcing steel,
or entraining air in the concrete, or adding a calcium-nitrate admixture, or adding
an internal-barrier admixture, or cathodic protection, or a combination of these
methods.
    To inhibit corrosion, calcium-nitrate admixtures are added to the concrete at the
time of batching. They do not create a physical barrier to chloride ion ingress.
Rather, they modify the concrete chemistry near the steel surface. The nitrite ions
oxidize ferrous oxide present, converting it to ferric oxide. The nitrite is also ab-
sorbed at the steel surface and fortifies the ferric-oxide passivating layer. For a
calcium-nitrite admixture to be effective, the dosage should be adjusted in accord-
ance with the exposure condition of the concrete to corrosive agents. The greater
the exposure, the larger should be the dosage. The correct dosage can only be
determined on a project-by-project basis with data for the specific admixture pro-
posed.
    Internal-barrier admixtures come in two groups. One comprises waterproofing
and dampproofing compounds (Art. 4.15). The second consists of agents that create
an organic film around the reinforcing steel, supplementing the passivating layer.
This type of admixture is promoted for addition at a fixed rate regardless of ex-
pected chloride exposure.


4.13.7   Coloring Admixtures

Colors are added to concrete for architectural reasons. They may be mineral oxides
or manufactured pigments. Raw carbon black, a commonly used material for black
color, greatly reduces the amount of entrained air in a mix. Therefore, if black
concrete is desired for concrete requiring air-entrainment (for freeze-thaw or ag-
gressive chemical exposure), either the carbon black should be modified to entrain
air or an additional air-entraining agent may be incorporated in the mix. The mix
design should be tested under field conditions prior to its use in construction. Use
4.18                                 SECTION FOUR


of color requires careful control of materials, batching, and water addition in order
to maintain a consistent color at the jobsite.



4.14    FIBERS FOR CONCRETE MIXES

As used in concrete, fibers are discontinuous, discrete units. They may be described
by their aspect ratio, the ratio of length to equivalent diameter. Fibers find their
greatest use in crack control of concrete flatwork, especially slabs on grade.
    The most commonly used types of fibers in concrete are synthetics, which in-
clude polypropylene, nylon, polyester, and polyethylene materials. Specialty syn-
thetics include aramid, carbon, and acrylic fibers. Glass-fiber-reinforced concrete is
made using E-glass and alkali-resistant (AR) glass fibers. Steel fibers are chopped
high-tensile or stainless steel.
    Fibers should be dispersed uniformly throughout a mix. Orientation of the fibers
in concrete generally is random. Conventional reinforcement, in contrast, typically
is oriented in one or two directions, generally in planes parallel to the surface.
Further, welded-wire fabric or reinforcing steel bars must be held in position as
concrete is placed. Regardless of the type, fibers are effective in crack control
because they provide omnidirectional reinforcement to the concrete matrix. With
steel fibers, impact strength and toughness of concrete may be greatly improved
and flexural and fatigue strengths enhanced.
    Synthetic fibers are typically used to replace welded-wire fabric as secondary
reinforcing for crack control in concrete flatwork. Depending on the fiber length,
the fiber can limit the size and spread of plastic shrinkage cracks or both plastic
and drying shrinkage cracks. Although synthetic fibers are not designed to provide
structural properties, slabs tested in accordance with ASTM E72, ‘‘Standard Meth-
ods of Conducting Strength Tests of Panels for Building Construction,’’ showed that
test slabs reinforced with synthetic fibers carried greater uniform loads than slabs
containing welded wire fabric. While much of the research for synthetic fibers has
used reinforcement ratios greater than 2%, the common field practice is to use 0.1%
(1.5 lb / yd3). This dosage provides more cross-sectional area than 10-gage welded-
wire fabric. The empirical results indicate that cracking is significantly reduced and
is controlled. A further benefit of fibers is that after the initial cracking, the fibers
tend to hold the concrete together.
    Aramid, carbon, and acrylic fibers have been studied for structural applications,
such as wrapping concrete columns to provide additional strength. Other possible
uses are for corrosion-resistance structures. The higher costs of the specialty syn-
thetics limit their use in general construction.
    Glass-fiber-reinforced concrete (GFRC) is used to construct many types of build-
ing elements, including architectural wall panels, roofing tiles, and water tanks. The
full potential of GFRC has not been attained because the E-glass fibers are alkali
reactive and the AR-glass fibers are subject to embrittlement, possibly from infil-
tration of calcium-hydroxide particles.
    Steel fibers can be used as a structural material and replace conventional rein-
forcing steel. The volume of steel fiber in a mix ranges from 0.5 to 2%. Much
work has been done to develop rapid repair methods using thin panels of densely
packed steel fibers and a cement paste squeegeed into the steel matrix. American
Concrete Institute Committee 544 states in ‘‘Guide for Specifying, Mixing, Placing,
and Finishing Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete,’’ ACI 544.3R, that, in structural
                               BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.19


members such as beams, columns, and floors not on grade, reinforcing steel should
be provided to support the total tensile load. In other cases, fibers can be used to
reduce section thickness or improve performance. See also ACI 344.1R and 344.2R.


4.15     MISCELLANEOUS ADMIXTURES

There are many miscellaneous concrete additives for use as pumping aids and as
dampproofing, permeability-reducing, gas-forming agents.
    Pumping aids are used to decrease the viscosity of harsh or marginally pump-
able mixes. Organic and synthetic polymers, fly ash, bentonite, or hydrated lime
may be used for this purpose. Results depend on concrete mix, including the effects
of increased water demand and the potential for lower strength resulting from the
increased water-cement ratio. If sand makes the mix marginally pumpable, fly ash
is the preferred pumping additive. It generally will not increase the water demand
and it will react with the calcium hydroxide in cement to provide some strength
increase.
    Dampproofing admixtures include soaps, stearates, and other petroleum prod-
ucts. They are intended to reduce passage of water and water vapor through con-
crete. Caution should be exercised when using these materials inasmuch as they
may increase water demand for the mix, thus increasing the permeability of the
concrete. If dense, low-permeable concrete is desired, the water-cement ratio should
be kept to a maximum of 0.50 and the concrete should be well vibrated and damp
cured.
    Permeability of concrete can be decreased by the use of fly ash and silica fume
as admixtures. Also, use of a high-range water-reducing admixture and a water-
cement ratio less than 0.50 will greatly reduce permeability.
    Gas-forming admixtures are used to form lightweight concrete. They are also
used in masonry grout where it is desirable for the grout to expand and bond to
the concrete masonry unit. They are typically an aluminum powder.


MORTARS AND CONCRETES

4.16 MORTARS

Mortars are composed of a cementitious material, fine aggregate, sand, and water.
They are used for bedding unit masonry, for plasters and stuccoes, and with the
addition of coarse aggregate, for concrete. Here consideration is given primarily to
those mortars used for unit masonry and plasters.
   Properties of mortars vary greatly, being dependent on the properties of the
cementitious material used, ratio of cementitious material to sand, characteristics
and grading of the sand, and ratio of water to solids.


4.16.1   Packaging and Proportioning of Mortar

Mortars are usually proportioned by volume. A common specification is that not
more than 3 ft3 of sand be used with 1 ft3 of cementitious material. Difficulty is
4.20                                 SECTION FOUR


sometimes encountered, however, in determining just how much material constitutes
a cubic foot: a bag of cement (94 lb) by agreement is called a cubic foot in pro-
portioning mortars or concretes, but an actual cubic foot of lime putty may be used
in proportioning mortars. Since hydrated limes are sold in 50-lb bags (Art. 4.5.3),
each of which makes somewhat more than a cubic foot of putty, weights of 40, 42,
and 45 lb of hydrated lime have been used as a cubic foot in laboratory studies;
but on the job, a bag is frequently used as a cubic foot. Masonry cements are sold
in bags containing 70 to 80 lb (Art. 4.8), and a bag is considered a cubic foot.


4.16.2   Properties of Mortars

Table 4.4 lists types of mortars as a guide in selection for unit masonry.
    Workability is an important property of mortars, particularly of those used in
conjunction with unit masonry of high absorption. Workability is controlled by the
character of the cement and amount of sand. For example, a mortar made from 3
parts sand and 1 part slaked lime putty will be more workable than one made from
2 parts sand and 1 part portland cement. But the 3:1 mortar has lower strength. By
proper selection or mixing of cementitious materials, a satisfactory compromise
may usually be obtained, producing a mortar of adequate strength and workability.
    Water retention—the ratio of the flow after 1-min standard suction to the flow
before suction—is used as an index of the workability of mortars. A high value of
water retention is considered desirable for most purposes. There is, however, a wide
variation in water retention of mortars made with varying proportions of cement
and lime and with varying limes. The ‘‘Standard Specification for Mortar for Unit
Masonry,’’ ASTM C270, requires mortar mixed to an initial flow of 100 to 115, as
determined by the test method of ASTM C109, to have a flow after suction of at
least 75%.
    Strength of mortar is frequently used as a specification requirement, even though
it has little relation to the strength of masonry. (See, for example, ASTM C270,


TABLE 4.4 Types of Mortar

                                                                                Min avg
                                                                             compressive
                                   Parts by volume                            strength of
                                                                               three 2-in
Mortar   Portland   Masonry    Hydrated lime or      Aggregate measured in   cubes at 28
 type    cement     cement       lime putty          damp, loose condition      days, psi
  M          1         1                                                        2500
                               1
             1                  ⁄4
            1
  S          ⁄2        1                                                        1800
             1                 Over 1⁄4 to 1⁄2       Not less than 21⁄4
  N                    1                               and not more than         750
            1                  Over 1⁄2 to 11⁄4        3 times the sum of
  O                    1                               the volumes of the        350
            1                  Over 11⁄4 to 21⁄2       cements and limes
  K         1                  Over 21⁄2 to 4          used                       75
                               1
 PL         1                    ⁄4 to 1⁄2                                      2500
 PM         1          1                                                        2500
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.21


C780, and C476). The strength of mortar is affected primarily by the amount of
cement in the matrix. Other factors of importance are the ratio of sand to cementing
material, curing conditions, and age when tested.
   Volume change of mortars constitutes another important property. Normal vol-
ume change (as distinguished from unsoundness) may be considered as the shrink-
age during early hardening, shrinkage on drying, expansion on wetting, and changes
due to temperature.
   After drying, mortars expand again when wetted. Alternate wetting and drying
produces alternate expansion and contraction, which apparently continues indefi-
nitely with portland-cement mortars.
   Coefficients of thermal expansion of several mortars, reported in ‘‘Volume
Changes in Brick Masonry Materials,’’ Journal of Research of the National Bureau
of Standards, Vol. 6, p. 1003, ranged from 0.38 ⫻ 10⫺5 to 0.60 ⫻ 10⫺5 for masonry-
cement mortars; from 0.41 ⫻ 10⫺5 to 0.53 ⫻ 10⫺5 for lime mortars, and from
0.42 ⫻ 10⫺5 to 0.61 ⫻ 10⫺5 for cement mortars. Composition of the cementitious
material apparently has little effect on the coefficient of thermal expansion of a
mortar.


4.16.3   High-Bond Mortars

When polymeric materials, such as styrene-butadiene and polyvinylidene chloride,
are added to mortar, greatly increased bonding, compressive, and shear strengths
result. To obtain high strength, the other materials, including sand, water, Type I
or III portland cement, and a workability additive, such as pulverized ground lime-
stone or marble dust, must be of quality equal to that of the ingredients of standard
mortar. The high strength of the mortar enables masonry to withstand appreciable
bending and tensile stresses. This makes possible thinner walls and prelaying of
single-wythe panels that can be hoisted into place.



4.17     PORTLAND-CEMENT CONCRETE

Portland-cement concrete is a mixture of portland cement, water, coarse and fine
aggregates, and admixtures proportioned to form a plastic mass capable of being
cast, placed, or molded into forms that will harden to a solid mass. The desirable
properties of plastic concrete are that it be workable, placeable and nonsegregating,
and that it set in the desired time. The hardened concrete should provide the desired
service properties:

1. Strength (compressive and flexural)
2. Durability (lack of cracks, resistance to freezing and thawing and to chemical
   attacks, abrasion resistance, and air content)
3. Appearance (color, lack of surface imperfections)

   Each of these properties affects the final cost of the mix design and the cost of
the in-place concrete. These properties are available from normal-weight, light-
weight, and heavyweight concretes.
4.22                                SECTION FOUR


4.17.1   Normal-Weight Concrete

The nominal weight of normal concrete is 144 lb / ft3 for non-air-entrained concrete,
but is less the air-entrained concrete. (The weight of concrete plus steel reinforce-
ment is often assumed as 150 lb / ft3.)
    Strength for normal-weight concrete ranges from 2000 to 20,000 psi. It is gen-
erally measured using a standard test cylinder 6 in in diameter by 12 in high. The
strength of a concrete is defined as the average strength of two cylinders taken from
the same load and tested at the same age. Flexural beams 6 ⫻ 6 ⫻ 20 in may be
used for concrete paving mixes. The strength gains of air-entrained and non-air-
entrained concretes are graphically shown in Fig. 9.2.
    As illustrated in Fig. 9.2, the strength of a given mix is determined by the water-
cement ratio (W / C), and whether or not air entraining is used. Other factors are
the maximum-size aggregate and the desired fluidity (slump) of the concrete at the
point of placement. When no historical record is available for the aggregates and
cements to be used, the water-cement ratios in Table 9.2 can provide guidance for
the initial designs.
    Each combination of coarse and fine aggregates has a specific water demand for
a given mix fluidity, or slump. Two general guidelines are:

1. For a constant slump, the water demand increases with increase in maximum-
   size aggregate.
2. For a constant maximum-size aggregate, as the slump increases, the water de-
   mand increases.

    There are many different methods for designing a normal-weight concrete mix.
A standard method is given in ACI 211, ‘‘Standard Practice for Selecting Propor-
tions for Normal, Heavyweight, and Mass Concrete.’’ See also Art. 9.10.
    Workability of a concrete is the property most important to contractors who
must place the concrete into forms and finish it. Workability includes the properties
of cohesiveness, plasticity, and nonsegregation. It is greatly influenced by aggregate
shape and gradation. Mixes that are hard to pump, place, and finish include those
deficient in fines, those with flat and elongated aggregates, and those with an ex-
cessive amount of fines (sand and cement). If the sand is deficient in fines, work-
ability can be increased by addition of 30 to 50 lb / yd3 of fly ash. The most effective
method of producing workable concrete is to employ a well graded, combined
aggregate gradation.
    Modulus of elasticity of normal-weight concrete is between 2,000,000 and
6,000,000 psi. An estimate of the modulus of elasticity for normal-weight concrete
with compressive strengths ƒ⬘c between 3000 and 5000 psi can be obtained by
multiplying the square root of ƒ⬘c by 57,000. Above 5000 psi, the modulus should
be determined using the procedure of ASTM C469. [See also Eq. (4.1) in Art.
4.17.2.]
    Volume changes occur as either drying shrinkage, creep, or expansion due to
external thermal sources. Drying shrinkage causes the most problems, because it
produces cracks in the concrete surface. The primary cause of drying shrinkage
cracks is an excessive amount of water in the mix. The water has two effects. First,
it increases the water-cement ratio (W / C), weakening the concrete. Second, addi-
tional water beyond that needed for hydration of the cement creates an excessive
number of bleed channels to exposed surfaces. When the cement paste undergoes
its normal drying shrinkage, these channels cannot provide any resistance to pen-
etration of water or aggressive chemicals.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                               4.23


    Creep is a time-dependent deformation of concrete that occurs after an external
load is applied to the concrete. It is an important consideration in design of pre-
stressed concrete.
    Concrete expands when heated and contracts when cooled. Coefficients of ther-
mal expansion range from 3.2 to 7.0 millionths per ⬚F. The most notable result of
the response of concrete to thermal changes is the movement of external walls,
which may bow because of temperature differentials.
    Normal-weight concrete that is not designed for fire exposure expands on being
heated. A side effect is some strength loss and a reduction in the modulus of
elasticity.
    Resistance to freezing and thawing can be accomplished by proper air entrain-
ment in the concrete, use of a mix with a minimum water content, and proper
curing of the concrete. Table 9.3 provides guidelines for the amount of air to use
based upon exposure and maximum aggregate size.
    Chemical attack may be internal (alkali-aggregate reaction) or external (sulfate
attack or an aggressive service environment). In either case, the basic concerns are
the characteristics of the available materials and the environment in which the
concrete will be used. Alkali-reactive aggregates should be avoided, but if they
must be used, a low-alkali cement complying with ASTM C150 Type II Modified
should be selected. If sulfate attack is a concern, a low W / C (0.45 maximum) and
air entrainment should be used with either a C150 Type V cement or a C150 Type
II cement with C618 Type F fly ash. For protection from attack by other chemicals,
a low W / C (0.45 maximum), more concrete cover over the reinforcing steel, a
corrosion-protection additive, or a latex-modified concrete should be used. The
American Concrete Institute ‘‘Building Code Requirements for Reinforced Con-
crete,’’ ACI 318, contains requirements for special exposure conditions.
    Abrasion resistance is a concern with pavements and hydraulic structures. Both
require use of sound, durable, hard-rock aggregates, low W / C, and well-cured con-
crete.
    Acceptable appearance depends on good workmanship and a supply of con-
sistent materials. The formwork should be watertight and properly oiled before
concrete placement. Forms should not be made of wood that will release sugars
into the concrete and create a retarded surface finish. During concrete placement,
the concrete should have consistent workability. The forms should be uniformly
and consistently vibrated to consolidate the concrete.
    (‘‘Standard Practice for Selecting Proportions for Normal Heavyweight, and
Mass Concrete,’’ ACI 211.1, and ‘‘Guide for Use of Normal Weight Aggregates in
Concrete,’’ ACI 221.)


4.17.2   Lightweight Concrete

Concrete weighing considerably less than the 144 lb / ft3 of normal-weight concrete
may be produced by use of lightweight aggregates or by expanding or foaming the
concrete. Lightweight concrete is used principally to reduce the dead load of a
structure and lower the cost of foundations. The light weight of the aggregates used
for this type of concrete derives from the cellular structure of the particles. Hence,
lightweight-aggregate concrete as well as foamed and expanded concretes have
excellent fire-protection capabilities because of the internal voids in the aggregates
or the concrete itself. When lightweight aggregates are used, they may be both fine
and coarse, or lightweight coarse and normal-weight fine (sand), or normal-weight
coarse and lightweight fine. The last combination is the least often used. Unit
4.24                                SECTION FOUR


weights range from 90 lb / ft3 (all aggregates lightweight) to 115 lb / ft3 (sand light-
weight). Typically, compressive strengths range from 2500 to 4000 psi. High-
strength lightweight concretes, however, have been produced with maximum unit
weights of 125 lb / ft3 and strengths from 6000 to 9000 psi. Structural lightweight
concretes are defined by the ACI as concretes with a 28-day compressive strength
more than 2500 psi and air-dry unit weight of 115 lb / ft3 or less.
    The variable amount of water absorbed in the voids of lightweight aggregates
makes use of W / C difficult in design of a lightweight-aggregate mix (Table 4.5).
Air entrainment of 4 to 6% is desirable to prevent segregation. Maximum size of
the coarse aggregate should not exceed half the depth of cover over the reinforcing
steel.
    Lightweight-aggregate concrete exposed to sulfates should have a compressive
strength ranging from 3750 to 4750 psi (see ACI 318). For marine structures, the
W / C should not exceed 0.40 and at least seven bags of cement should be used per
cubic yard of concrete.
    The modulus of elasticity Ec of lightweight concrete generally ranges from
1,500,000 to 3,000,000 psi. It may be estimated from

                                    Ec ⫽ w1.5兹ƒ⬘c                                 (4.1)

where w ⫽ unit weight of concrete, lb / ft3
      ƒ⬘c ⫽ 28-day compressive strength of concrete, psi

    Volume changes occur in lightweight concrete as in normal-weight concrete,
but lightweight concrete is stabler when exposed to heat. Drying shrinkage causes
the most undesirable volume changes, because it produces cracks in the surfaces
of the concrete. The primary cause of drying-shrinkage cracks is excessive water
in the mix. The water has two effects. First, it increases the W / C and weakens the
concrete. Second, the additional water beyond that needed for hydration of the
cement creates an excessive number of bleed channels to the exposed surfaces.
When the cement paste undergoes normal drying shrinkage, these channels cannot
provide any resistance to ingress of aggressive chemicals.
    Creep is an important concern for lightweight concrete, as it is for normal-weight
concrete, especially for prestressed concrete.
    (‘‘Standard Practice for Selecting Proportions for Structural Lightweight Con-
crete,’’ ACI 211.2, and ‘‘Guide for Structural Lightweight Aggregate Concrete,’’
ACI 213.)



                   TABLE 4.5 Approximate Relationship between
                   Cement Content and Compressive Strength

                   Compressive      Aggregates all    Sand aggregate
                   strength ƒ⬘c,     lightweight,      lightweight,
                        psi             lb / yd3          lb / yd3
                       2500           400–510            400–510
                       3000           440–560            420–560
                       4000           530–660            490–660
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                 4.25


4.17.3   Heavyweight Concrete

Concretes made with heavyweight aggregates are used for shielding and structural
purposes in construction of nuclear reactors and other structures exposed to high-
intensity radiation (see Art. 4.12). Heavyweight aggregates are used where heavy-
weight is needed, such as ship’s ballast and encasement of underwater pipes, and
for making shielding concretes because absorption of such radiation is proportional
to density, and consequently, these aggregates have greater capacity for absorption
than those ordinarily used for normal concrete. With such aggregates, concrete
weighing up to about 385 lb / ft3 can be produced.
     Concrete made with limonite or magnetite can develop densities of 210 to 224
lb / ft3 and compressive strengths of 3200 to 5700 psi. With barite, concrete may
weigh 230 lb / ft3 and have a strength of 6000 psi. With steel punchings and sheared
bars as coarse aggregate and steel shot as fine aggregate, densities of 250 to 288
lb / ft3 and strengths of about 5600 psi can be attained. Generally, grading of ag-
gregates and mix proportions are similar to those used for normal concrete.
     The properties of heavyweight concrete are similar to those of normal-weight
concrete. Mixing and placing operations, however, are more difficult than those for
normal-weight concrete, because of segregation. Good grading, high cement con-
tent, low W / C, and air entrainment should be employed to prevent segregation.
Sometimes, heavyweight aggregates are grouted in place to avoid segregation.
Heavyweight concretes usually do not have good resistance to weathering or ab-
rasion.
     (‘‘Recommended Practice for Selecting Proportions for Normal, Heavyweight,
and Mass Concrete,’’ ACI 211.1.)


4.17.4   High-Performance Concretes

These concretes either have a high design strength (more than 6000 psi for normal-
weight concrete and 5000 psi for lightweight concrete) or will be subjected to severe
service environments. The differences between high-performance concretes and
normal-weight concretes is that the former have lower W / C and smaller maxi-
mum aggregate size. ACI 318 specifies the W / C and compressive strengths for con-
crete in severe exposures and the maximum chloride-ion content of concrete. High-
performance concrete is defined by either durability or strength-performance char-
acteristics. Durability characteristics are resistance to freeze-thaw, scaling, abrasion,
and chloride permeability. The strength characteristics have been defined in four
grades as shown in Table 4.6. (See also Art. 4.17.1)
    High-strength, portland-cement concretes generally incorporate in the mix fly
ash, silica fume, or superplasticizers, or a combination of these admixtures. A re-
tarder is often beneficial in controlling early hydration. The W / C may be as small
as 0.25. The maximum size of aggregate should generally be limited to 1⁄2 in.
    With superplasticizers, relatively high strengths can be achieved at early ages,
such as 7-day strengths of normal concrete in 3 days and 28-day strengths in 7
days. Compressive strengths exceeding 10,000 psi can be achieved in 90 days.
    Aside from reduction in W / C, the use of superplasticizers in production of high-
strength concretes does not require significant changes in mix proportioning. An
increase in the range of sand content of about 5%, however, may help avoid a harsh
mix. Curing is very important, because strength gain halts when water is no longer
available for hydration. Also, it is important that proper quantities of air-entraining
admixtures be determined by trial. Some air loss may result when melamine- or
4.26                                     SECTION FOUR


TABLE 4.6 High-Performance Concrete Strength Characteristics

       Characteristic          Grade 1           Grade 2         Grade 3     Grade 4
Compressive strength,      6   ⱕX⬍8            8 ⱕ X ⬍ 10      10 ⱕ X ⬍ 14   X ⱖ 14
  ksi
Modulus of elasticity,     4   ⱕX⬍6            6 ⱕ X ⬍ 7.5       X ⱖ 7.5
  103 ksi
Shrinkage, microstrain, 600    ⱕ X ⬍ 800     400 ⱕ X ⬍ 600      X ⬍ 400
  in / in
Creep, microstrain,     0.41   ⬍ X ⱕ 0.52 0.31 ⬍ X ⱕ 0.41 0.21 ⬍ X ⱕ 0.31 X ⱕ 0.21
  in / in


naphthalene-based superplasticizers are used, whereas lignosulfonate-based water
reducers may actually increase air content. Larger amounts of air-entraining agent
may be needed for high-strength concretes, especially for low-slump mixes with
high cement content and mixes with large amounts of some types of fly ash. Fur-
thermore, some types of superplasticizers and air-entraining admixtures may not be
compatible with each other.
   (‘‘State-of-the-Art Report on High-Strength Concrete,’’ ACI 363.)

4.17.5      Nonstructural or Foamed Cellular Concretes
These are formed by the use of admixtures that generate or liberate gas bubbles in
concrete in the plastic stage. Aluminum powder, which reacts with the alkalies in
cement to release hydrogen, is generally used for this purpose, although hydrogen
peroxide, which generates oxygen, or activated carbon, which liberates absorbed
air, can be used. These foaming agents create stable, uniformly dispersed air spaces
within the concrete when it sets. Perlite and vermiculite are most frequently used
as aggregates. The resulting concrete may weigh 50 lb / ft3 or less and have a com-
pressive strength up to 2500 psi. Applications of such lightweight concretes include
topping and soundproofing barriers over structural concrete slabs.
    The effectiveness of the admixture is controlled by the duration of mixing, han-
dling, and placing of the mix relative to the gas-generation rate. The amount of
unpolished aluminum powder to be added to a mix may range from 0.005 to 0.02%
by weight of cement under normal conditions. Larger quantities, however, may be
used to produce lower-strength concretes. More aluminum may be needed at low
temperatures to achieve the same amount of concrete expansion, for example, twice
as much as 40⬚F as at 70⬚F. Furthermore, at low temperatures, to speed up gas
generation, it may be necessary to add to the mix alkalies such as sodium hydroxide,
hydrated lime, or trisodium phosphate. Also, to prevent the powder from floating
on the surface of mixing water, the aluminum may be premixed with sand or
combined with other admixtures.
    Curing is very important. If good curing practices and jointing are not followed,
extensive drying shrinkage may result.


4.18      POLYMER CONCRETES

Plastics with long-chain molecules, called polymers, are used in several ways to
enhance concrete properties: replacement of portland cement, incorporation in a
mix as an admixture, and impregnating hardened concrete.
                               BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.27


   Polymer concretes, such as methyl methacrylate and unsaturated polyester, in
which a polymer replaces portland cement may have more than double the strength
and modulus of elasticity of portland-cement concrete. Creep is less and resistance
to freezing and thawing cycles is higher with the polymer concretes. After curing
for a very short time, for example, overnight at room temperature, polymer con-
cretes are ready for use, whereas ordinary concrete may have to cure for about a
week before exposure to service loads.
   Monomers and polymers may be used as admixtures for restoring and resurfac-
ing deteriorated concrete surfaces. Latexes of methyl methacrylate, polyester, sty-
rene, epoxy-styrene, furans, styrene-butadiene, and vinylidene chloride have been
employed for these purposes. The resulting concrete hardens more rapidly than
normal concrete. A polymer admixture may also be used to improve the bonding
properties of portland cement. Inserted in a mix as an emulsion for this purpose,
the admixture supplies a significant amount of water to the mix, which becomes
available for hydration of the cement. The release of the water also sets the emul-
sion. Hence, moist curing is not desirable, inasmuch as the emulsion needs to dry
to develop the desired strength. A grout or mortar containing the bonding admixture
develops a higher bond strength when applied as a thin layer than as a thick one
and the bond may be stronger than materials being joined.
   Impregnation of concrete with polymers is sometimes used to harden surfaces
exposed to heavy traffic. Strength and other properties of the impregnated concrete
are similar to those of concrete in which polymers replace portland cement. Im-
pregnation is achieved by first drying the concrete surface with heat and then soak-
ing the surface with a monomer, such as methyl methacrylate, styrene, acrylonitrile,
or tert-butyl styrene. It is subsequently cured with heat.

Slab Toppings. At least partly because of excellent adhesion, epoxies are for-
mulated with sand and other fillers to provide surfacing materials for concrete.
Unlike standard concrete topping, epoxy-based surfacing materials can be thin.
They are especially useful for smoothing uneven, irregular surfaces. The epoxy
cures quickly, allowing use of the surface in a short time.

Grout. Cracked concrete can be repaired with an epoxy grout. The grout is forced
into cracks under pressure for deep penetration. Because of its good bonding
strength, the epoxy grout can largely restore strength, while, at the same time,
sealing the crack against penetration by liquids.
    (‘‘Polymers in Concrete,’’ ACI 548; ‘‘Guide for the Use of Polymers in Con-
crete,’’ ACI 548.1; and ‘‘Polymer Modified Concrete,’’ SP-99, American Concrete
Institute.)



4.19   CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS

A wide variety of manufactured products are produced from concrete and used in
building construction. These include such items as concrete brick, concrete block
or tile, concrete floor and roof slabs, precast wall panels, precast beams, and cast
stone. These items are made both from normal dense concrete mixes and from
mixes with lightweight aggregates. Concrete blocks are made with holes through
them to reduce their weight and to enable masons to grip them.
   Nominal size (actual dimensions plus width of mortar joint) of hollow concrete
block usually is 8 ⫻ 8 ⫻ 16 in. Solid blocks often are available with nominal size
4.28                               SECTION FOUR


of 4 ⫻ 8 ⫻ 16 in or 4 ⫻ 21⁄2 ⫻ 8 in. For a list of modular sizes, see ‘‘Standard
Sizes of Clay and Concrete Modular Units,’’ ANSI A62.3.
    Properties of the units vary tremendously—from strong, dense, load-bearing
units used under exposed conditions to light, relatively weak, insulating units used
for roof and fire-resistant construction.
    Many types of concrete units have not been covered by adequate standard spec-
ifications. For these units, reliance must be placed upon the manufacturer’s speci-
fications. Requirements for strength and absorption of concrete brick and block
established by ASTM for Type I, Grades N-I and S-I (moisture-controlled), and
Type II, Grades N-II and S-II (non-moisture-controlled), units are summarized in
Table 4.7.
    Manufactured concrete units have the advantage (or sometimes disadvantage)
that curing is under the control of the manufacturer. Many methods of curing are
used, from simply stacking the units in a more or less exposed location to curing
under high-pressure steam. The latter method appears to have considerable merit
in reducing ultimate shrinkage of the block. Shrinkage may be as small as 1⁄4 to 3⁄8
in per 100 ft for concrete units cured with high-pressure steam. These values are
about one-half as great as those obtained with normal atmospheric curing. Tests for
moisture movement in blocks cured with high-pressure and high-temperature steam
indicate expansions of from 1⁄4 to 1⁄2 in per 100 ft after saturation of previously
dried specimens.



BURNED-CLAY UNITS

Use of burned-clay structural units dates from prehistoric times. Hence durability
of well-burned units has been adequately established through centuries of exposure
in all types of climate.
   Modern burned-clay units are made in a wide variety of sizes, shapes, colors,
and textures to suit the requirements of modern architecture. They include such
widely diverse units as common and face brick; hollow clay tile in numerous
shapes, sizes, and designs for special purposes; ceramic tile for decorative and
sanitary finishes, and architectural terra cotta for ornamentation.
   Properties of burned-clay units vary with the type of clay or shale used as raw
material, method of fabrication of the units, and temperature of burning. As a
consequence, some units, such as salmon brick, are underburned, highly porous,
and of poor strength. But others are almost glass hard, have been pressed and burned
to almost eliminate porosity, and are very strong. Between these extremes lie most
of the units used for construction.



4.20   BRICK—CLAY OR SHALE

Brick have been made in a wide range of sizes and shapes, from the old Greek
brick, which was practically a 23-in cube of 12,650 in3 volume, to the small Belgian
brick, about 13⁄4 ⫻ 33⁄8 ⫻ 41⁄2 in with a total volume of only 27 in3. The present
common nominal sizes in the United States are 4 or 6 in thick by 22⁄3 or 4 in high
by 8 or 12 in long. For a list of modular sizes, see ‘‘Standard Sizes of Clay and
Concrete Modular Masonry Units,’’ ANSI A62.3. Actual dimensions are smaller,
                                          BUILDING MATERIALS                                   4.29


TABLE 4.7 Summary of ASTM Specification Requirements for Concrete Masonry Units

                                                           Moisture content
                                                           for Type I units,
                                                           max, % of total
                                                               absorption           Moisture
                                                              (average of          absorption,
                                                                5 units)           max, lb. / ft3
                                                                               (average of 5 units)
                                           Compressive       Avg annual
                                            strength,          relative        Oven-dry weight of
                                             min, psi        humidity, %        concrete, lb / ft3
                                          Avg      Indi-          75           125    105
                                          of 5    vidual   Over   to   Under    or     to   Under
                                          units     min     75    50    50     more   125    105
Concrete building brick,
  ASTM C55:
  N-I, N-II (high strength severe         3500    3000                          10     13     15
     exposures)
  S-I, S-II (general use,                 2500    2000                          13     15     18
     moderate exposures)
  Linear shrinkage, %:
     0.03 or less                                          45     40    35
     0.03 to 0.45                                          40     35    30
     Over 0.045                                            35     30    25
Solid, load-bearing units,
  ASTM C145:
  N-I, N-II (unprotected exterior         1800    1500                          13     15     18
     walls below grade or above
     grade exposed to frost)
  S-I, S-II (protected exterior           1200    1000                                        20*
     walls below grade or above
     grade exposed to frost)
     Linear shrinkage, %; (Same
     as for brick)
Hollow, load bearing units,
  ASTM C90:
  N-I, N-II (general use)                 1000     800                          13     15     18
  S-I, S-II (above grade,                  700     600                                        20*
     weather protected) Linear
     shrinkage, %; (Same as for
     brick)
Hollow, non-load-bearing units,             600    500
  ASTM C129
  Linear shrinkage, %; (Same
  as for brick)
   * For units weighing less than 85 lb / ft3.
4.30                                        SECTION FOUR


TABLE 4.8 Physical Requirements for Clay or Shale Solid Brick

                                    Compressive           Water absorption,        Saturation*
                                    strength, flat,          5-hr boil,            coefficient,
                                       min, psi              max—%                  max—%
                                    Avg       Indi-       Avg         Indi-      Avg         Indi-
           Grade                    of 5     vidual       of 5       vidual      of 5       vidual
SW—Severe weathering               3000       2500       17.0        20.0       0.78       0.80
MW—Moderate weathering             2500       2200       22.0        25.0       0.88       0.90
NW—No exposure                     1500       1250      No limit    No limit   No limit   No limit
   * Ratio of 24-hr cold absorption to 5-hr boil absorption.



usually by the amount of the width of the mortar joint. Current specification re-
quirements for strength and absorption of building brick are given in Table 4.8 (see
ASTM C652, C62, and C216). Strength and absorption of brick from different
producers vary widely.
   Thermal expansion of brick may range from 0.0000017 per ⬚F for fire-clay brick
to 0.0000069 per ⬚F for surface-clay brick. Wetting tests of brick indicated expan-
sions varying from 0.0005 to 0.025%.
   The thermal conductivity of dry brick as measured by several investigators
ranges from 1.29 to 3.79 Btu / (hr)(ft3)(⬚F)(in). The values are increased by wetting.


4.21    STRUCTURAL CLAY TILE

Structural clay tiles are hollow burned-clay masonry units with parallel cells. Such
units have multitude of uses: as a facing tile for interior and exterior unplastered
walls, partitions, or columns; as load-bearing tile in masonry constructions designed
to carry superimposed loads; as partition tile for interior partitions carrying no
superimposed load; as fireproofing tile for protection of structural members against
fire; as furring tile for lining the inside of exterior walls; as floor tile in floor and
roof construction; and as header tiles, which are designed to provide recesses for
header units in brick or stone-faced walls. Units are available with the following
ranges in nominal dimensions: 8 to 16 in in length, 4 in for facing tile to 12 in for
load-bearing tile in height, and 2 in for facing tile to 12 in for load-bearing tile in
thickness.
    Two general types of tile are available—side-construction tile, designed to re-
ceive its principal stress at right angles to the axis of the cells, and end-construction
tile designed to receive its principal stress parallel to the axis of the cells.
    Tiles are also available in a number of surface finishes, such as opaque glazed
tile, clear ceramic-glazed tile, nonlustrous glazed tile, and scored, combed, or
roughened finishes designed to receive mortar, plaster, or stucco.
    Requirements of the appropriate ASTM specifications for absorption and
strength of several types of tile are given in Table 4.9 (see ASTM C34, C56, C57,
C212, and C126 for details pertaining to size, color, texture, defects, etc.). Strength
and absorption of tile made from similar clays but from different sources and man-
ufacturers vary widely. The modulus of elasticity of tile may range from 1,620,000
to 6,059,000 psi.
                                         BUILDING MATERIALS                                            4.31


TABLE 4.9 Physical Requirement Specification for Structural Clay Tile

                                                                          Compressive strength, psi
                                                                           (based on gross area)
                                                                       End-                   Side-
                                                                    construction           construction
                                          Absorption, %                 tile                   tile
                                          (1 hr boiling)
                                                                 Min                     Min
                                      Avg of 5    Individual    avg of     Individual   avg of    Individual
         Type and grade                 tests        max        5 tests       min       5 tests      min
Loading-bearing (ASTM C34):
  LBX                                    16            19        1400         1000        700         500
  LB                                     25            28        1000          700        700         500
Non-load-bearing (ASTM C56):
  NB                                                   28
Floor tile (ASTM C57):
  FT1                                                  25        3200         2250      1600        1100
  FT2                                                  25        2000         1400      1200         850
Facing tile (ASTM C212):
  FTX                                  9 (max)         11
  FTS                                 16 (max)         19
  Standard                                                       1400         1000       700         500
  Special duty                                                   2500         2000      1200        1000
Glazed units (ASTM C126)                                         3000         2500      2000        1500

     LBX. Tile suitable for general use in masonry construction and adapted for use in masonry exposed to
weathering. They may also be considered suitable for direct application of stucco.
     LB. Tile suitable for general use in masonry where not exposed to frost action, or in exposed masonry
where protected with a facing of 3 in or more of stone, brick, terra cotta, or other masonry.
     NB. Non-load-bearing tile made from surface clay, shale, or fired clay.
     FT 1 and FT 2. Tile suitable for use in flat or segmental panels or in combination tile and concrete
ribbed-slab construction.
     FTX. Smooth-face tile suitable for general use in exposed exterior and interior masonry walls and
partitions, and adapted for use where tiles low in absorption, easily cleaned, and resistant to staining are
required and where a high degree of mechanical perfection, narrow color range, and minimum variation in
face dimensions are required.
     FTS. Smooth or rough-texture face tile suitable for general use in exposed exterior and interior masonry
walls and partitions and adapted for use where tile of moderate absorption, moderate variation in face
dimensions, and medium color range may be used, and where minor defects in surface finish, including
small handling chips, are not objectionable.
     Standard. Tile suitable for general use in exterior or interior masonry walls and partitions.
     Special duty. Tile suitable for general use in exterior or interior masonry walls and partitions and
designed to have superior resistance to impact and moisture transmission, and to support greater lateral and
compressive loads than standard tile construction.
     Glazed units. Ceramic-glazed structural clay tile with a glossy or stain-mat finish of either an opaque
or clear gaze, produced by the application of a coating prior to firing and subsequently made vitreous by
firing.
4.32                               SECTION FOUR


4.22   CERAMIC TILES

Ceramic tile is a burned-clay product used primarily for decorative and sanitary
effects. It is composed of a clay body on which is superimposed a decorative glaze.
    The tiles are usually flat but vary in size from about 1⁄2 in square to more than
6 in. Their shape is also widely variable—squares, rectangles, and hexagons are
the predominating forms, to which must be added coved moldings and other dec-
orative forms. These tiles are not dependent on the color of the clay for their final
color, since they are usually glazed. Hence, they are available in a complete color
gradation from pure whites through pastels of varying hue to deep solid colors and
jet blacks.
    Properties of the base vary somewhat. In particular, absorption ranges from al-
most zero to about 15%. The glaze is required to be impervious to liquids and
should not stain, crack, or craze.
    Ceramic tiles are applied on a solid backing by means of a mortar or adhesive.
They are usually applied with the thinnest possible mortar joint; consequently ac-
curacy of dimensions is of greatest importance. Since color, size, and shape of tile
are important, selection of tile should be based on the current literature of the
manufacturer.


4.23   ARCHITECTURAL TERRA COTTA

The term ‘‘terra cotta’’ has been applied for centuries to decorative molded-clay
objects whose properties are similar to brick. The molded shapes are fired in a
manner similar to brick.
   Terra cotta is frequently glazed to produce a desired color or finish. This intro-
duces the problem of cracking or crazing of the glaze, particularly over large areas.
   Structural properties of terra cotta are similar to those of clay or shale brick.


BUILDING STONES

Principal building stones generally used in the United States are limestones, mar-
bles, granites, and sandstones. Other stones such as serpentine and quartzite are
used locally but to a much lesser extent. Stone, in general, makes an excellent
building material, if properly selected on the basis of experience; but the cost may
be relatively high.
   Properties of stone depend on what nature has provided. Therefore, the designer
does not have the choice of properties and color available in some of the manu-
factured building units. The most the stone producer can do for purchasers is to
avoid quarrying certain stone beds that have been proved by experience to have
poor strength or poor durability.


4.24   PROPERTIES OF BUILDING STONES

Data on the strength of building stones are presented in Table 4.10, summarized
from U.S. National Bureau of Standards Technical Papers, No. 123, B. S. Vol. 12;
TABLE 4.10 Strength Characteristics of Commercial Building Stones

                     Compressive        Modulus           Shear       Tensile           Elastic                               Wear
                      strength,        of rupture,      strength,    strength,         modulus,           Toughness         resistance
                         psi,              psi,            psi,         psi,             psi,
       Stone            range             range           range        range            range            Range   Avg      Range          Avg
Granite               7,700–60,000    1,430–5,190     2,000–4,800    600–1,000    5,700,000–8,200,000    8–27    13     43.9–87.9        60.8
Marble                8,000–50,000      600–4,900     1,300–6,500    150–2,300    7,200,000–14,500,000   2–23     6      6.7–41.7        18.9
Limestone             2,600–28,000      500–2,000       800–4,580    280–890      1,500,000–12,400,000   5–20     7      1.3–24.1         8.4
Sandstone             5,000–20,000      700–2,300       300–3,000    280–500      1,900,000–7,700,000    2–35    10      1.6–29.0        13.3
Quartzite            16,000–45,000                                                                       5–30    15
Serpentine           11,000–28,000    1,300–11,000                   800–1,600    4,800,000–9,600,000                   13.3–111.4       46.9
Basalt               28,000–67,000                                                                       6–38    23
Diorite              16,000–35,000                                                                       6–38    23
Syenite              14,000–28,000
Slate                                 6,000–15,000    2,000–3,600   3,000–4,300   9,800,000–18,000,000   10–56           5.6–11.7         7.7
Diabase                                                                                                   6–50   19
Building limestone                                                                                        3–8     4.4
4.33
4.34                                       SECTION FOUR


No. 305, Vol. 20, p. 191; No. 349, Vol. 21, p. 497; Journal of Research of the
National Bureau of Standards, Vol. 11, p. 635; Vol. 25, p. 161). The data in Table
4.9 pertain to dried specimens. Strengths of saturated specimens may be either
greater or less than that of completely dry specimens.
   The modulus of rupture of dry slate is given in Table 4.10 as ranging from 6000
to 15,000 psi. Similar slates, tested wet, gave moduli ranging from 4700 to 12,300
psi. The ratio of wet modulus to dry modulus varied from 0.42 to 1.12 and averaged
0.73.
   Data on the true specific gravity, bulk specific gravity, unit weights, porosity,
and absorption of various stones are given in Table 4.11.
   Permeability of stones varies with types of stone, thickness, and driving pressure
that forces water through the stone. Table 4.12 represents data for the more common
stones at three different pressures, as reported in ‘‘Permeability of Stone,’’ U.S.
National Bureau of Standards Technical Papers, No. 305, Vol. 20, p. 191. The units
of measurement of permeability are cubic inches of water that will flow through a
square foot of a specimen 1⁄2 in thick in 1 hr.
   Data on thermal expansion of building stones as given in Table 4.13 show that
limestones have a wide range of expansion as compared with granites and slates.
   Marble loses strength after repeated heating and cooling. A marble that had an
original strength of 9174 psi had a strength after 50 heatings to 150⬚C of 8998
psi—a loss of 1.9%. After 100 heatings to 150⬚C, the strength was only 8507 psi,
or a loss of 7.3%. The latter loss in strength was identical with that obtained on


TABLE 4.11 Specific Gravity and Porosity of Commercial Building Stones

                                                   Unit
                   Specific Gravity                                           Absorption, %
                                                  weight,
                                                  lb per       Porosity,     By          By
  Stone           True              Bulk           cu ft          %         weight     volume
Granite      2.599–3.080         2.60–3.04       157–187       0.4–3.8     0.02–0.58    0.4–1.8
Marble       2.718–2.879         2.64–2.86       165–179       0.4–2.1     0.01–0.45   0.04–1.2
Limestone    2.700–2.860         1.87–2.69       117–175       1.1–31.0                   6–15
Slate        2.771–2.898         2.74–2.89       168–180       0.1–1.7     0.00–1.63    0.3–2.0
Basalt                            2.9–3.2
Soapstone                         2.8–3.0
Gneiss                            2.7–3.0
Serpentine                        2.5–2.8        158–183
Sandstone                         2.2–2.7        119–168       1.9–27.3                  6–18
Quartzite                                        165–170       1.5–2.9



             TABLE 4.12 Permeability of Commercial Building Stones
             [in3 / ( ft2)(hr) for 1⁄2-in thickness]

             Pressure, psi                 1.2                 50            100
             Granite                 0.06–0.08                 0.11          0.28
             Slate                  0.006–0.008             0.08–0.11        0.11
             Marble                  0.06–0.35               1.3–16.8      0.9–28.0
             Limestone               0.36–2.24               4.2–44.8      9.0–109
             Sandstone                4.2–174.0               51.2            221
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.35


                      TABLE 4.13 Coefficient of Thermal
                      Expansion of Commercial Building Stones

                             Stone       Range of coefficient
                           Limestone       (4.2–22) ⫻ 10⫺6
                           Marble          (3.6–16) ⫻ 10⫺6
                           Sandstone       (5.0–12) ⫻ 10⫺6
                           Slate           (9.4–12) ⫻ 10⫺6
                           Granite         (6.3–9) ⫻ 10⫺6



freezing and thawing the same marble for 30 cycles. Also, marble retains a per-
manent expansion after repeated heating.


4.25   FREEZING AND THAWING OF STONE

In freezing and thawing tests of 89 different marbles (‘‘Physical and Chemical Tests
of Commercial Marbles of U.S.,’’ U.S. National Bureau of Standards Technical
Papers, No. 123, Vol. 12), after 30 cycles, 66 marbles showed loss of strength
ranging from 1.2 to 62.1% and averaging 12.3% loss. The other 23 marbles showed
increases in strength ranging from 0.5 to 43.9% and averaging 11.2% increase.
   Weight change was also determined in this investigation to afford another index
of durability. Of 86 possible comparisons after 30 cycles of freezing and thawing,
16 showed no change in weight, 64 showed decreases in weight ranging from 0.01
to 0.28% and averaging 0.04% loss, while 6 showed increases in weight ranging
from 0.01 to 0.08% and averaging 0.04%.


GYPSUM PRODUCTS

Gypsum is a cementitious material composed of at least 70% of CaSO4 䡠 2H2O by
weight (Art. 4.6). It is a main ingredient of many building products.


4.26   GYPSUMBOARD

This product consists of a core of set gypsum surfaced with specifically manufac-
tured paper firmly bonded to the core. It is designed to be used without addition
of plaster for walls, ceilings, or partitions and provides a surface suitable to receive
either paint or paper (see also Sec. 11). Gypsumboard is extensively used in ‘‘dry-
wall’’ construction, where plaster is eliminated. It is also available with one surface
covered with aluminum or other heat-reflecting type of foil, or with imitation wood-
grain or other patterns on the exposed surface so that no additional decoration is
required.
    The types of gypsumboard generally available include wallboard, backing board,
coreboard, fire-resistant gypsumboard, water-resistant gypsumboard, gypsum
sheathing, and gypsum formboard.
4.36                               SECTION FOUR


Gypsum Wallboard. This type is used for the surface layer on interior walls and
ceilings. Regular gypsum wallboard comes with gray liner paper on the back and
a special paper covering, usually cream-colored, on facing side and edges. This
covering provides a smooth surface suitable for decoration. Foil-backed gypsum
wallboard has aluminum foil bonded to the liner paper to serve as a vapor barrier
and, when contiguous to an airspace, as thermal insulation. Predecorated gypsum
wallboard does not require decorative treatment after installation because it comes
with a finished surface, often a decorative vinyl or paper sheet. Wallboard should
conform with ASTM C36.
   Wallboard usually is available 4 ft wide in the following thicknesses and lengths:
   1
     ⁄4 in—for covering and rehabilitating old walls and ceilings, 4 to 12 ft long
   5
     ⁄16 in—where thickness greater than 1⁄4 in is desired, 4 to 14 ft long.
   3
     ⁄8 in—mainly for the outer face in two-layer wall systems, 4 to 16 ft long
   1
     ⁄2 in—for single-layer new construction with supports 16 to 24 in c to c, 4 to
   16 ft long
   5
     ⁄8 in—for better fire resistance and sound control than 1⁄2 in provides, 4 to 16
   ft long
Standard edges are rounded, beveled, tapered, or square.

Backing Board. This type is used as a base layer in multi-ply construction, where
several layers of gypsumboard are desired for high fire resistance, sound control,
and strength in walls. It has gray liner paper on front and back faces. Also available
is backing board with aluminum foil bonded to the back face. Gypsum backing
board should conform with ASTM C442. The boards come 16 to 48 in wide, 4 to
16 ft long, and 1⁄4 to 1 in thick.

Gypsum Coreboard. To save space, this type is used as a base in multi-ply con-
struction of self-supporting (studless) gypsum walls. Coreboard may be supplied as
1-in-thick, solid backing board or as two factory-laminated, 1⁄2-in-thick layers of
backing board. Coreboard too should conform with C442.

Type X Gypsumboard. For use in fire-rated assemblies, Type X may be gypsum
wallboard, backing board, or coreboard with core made more fire resistant by ad-
dition of glass fiber or other reinforcing materials.

Water-Resistant Gypsum Backing Board. This type comes with a water-resistant
gypsum core and water-repellant face paper. It may be used as a base for wall tile
in baths, showers, and other areas subject to wetting. The board should conform
with ASTM C630.

Gypsum Sheathing. This type is used as fire protection and bracing of exterior
frame walls. It must be protected from the weather by an exterior facing. Sheathing
should conform with ASTM C79. It comes 24 to 48 in wide, 6 to 12 ft long, and
3
 ⁄8, 4⁄10, 1⁄2, and 5⁄8 in thick.

Gypsum Formboard. This type is used as a permanent form in the casting of
gypsum-concrete roof decks.
   (‘‘Architect Data Book—Construction Products and Systems,’’ Gold Bond Build-
ing Products, a National Gypsum Division, 2001 Rexford Road, Charlotte, NC
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.37


28211; ‘‘Gypsum Products Design Data,’’ Gypsum Association, 1603 Orrington
Ave., Evanston, IL 60201; ‘‘Gypsum Construction Handbook,’’ United States Gyp-
sum, 101 South Wacker Drive, Chicago, IL 60606.)



4.27   GYPSUM LATH

Gypsum lath is similar to gypsumboard in that it consists of a core of set gypsum
surfaced with paper. The paper for gypsumboard, however, is produced so that it
is ready to receive paint or paper, while that for gypsum lath is specially designed
or treated so that plaster will bond tightly to the paper. In addition, some lath
provides perforations or other mechanical keying to assist in holding the plaster
firmly on the lath. It is also available with reflective foil backing (see also Art.
11.25.5).
    Gypsum lath should conform with ASTM C37. It comes in 16-, 161⁄2-, 24-, and
32-in widths, lengths of 32, 36, and 48 in, and 3⁄8- and 1⁄2-in widths.
    Veneers plasters, special proprietary compositions for thin plaster surfaces, are
best applied over veneer plaster base, similar to gypsum lath, but produced to
accommodate the veneer plaster compositions. Both gypsum lath and veneer base
are made as regular, X-rated (fire-retardant), and insulating (foil-backed) types.
These bases should conform with ASTM G588. They come 48 in wide, 6 to 16 ft
long, and 3⁄8, 1⁄2, and 5⁄8 in thick.



4.28   GYPSUM SHEATHING BOARD

Gypsum sheathing boards are similar in construction to gypsumboard (Art. 4.26),
except that they are provided with a water-repellent paper surface. They are com-
monly made 3⁄4 to 5⁄8 in thick, 6 to 12 ft long, and with a nominal width of 24 or
48 in in conformance with ASTM C79. They are made with either square edges or
with V tongue-and-groove edges. Sheathing boards also are available with a water-
repellent core or fire-resistant Type X.



4.29   GYPSUM PARTITION TILE OR BLOCK

Gypsum tiles or blocks are used for non-load-bearing partition walls and for pro-
tection of columns, elevator shafts, etc., against fire. They have been essentially
replaced by dry-wall systems.



4.30   GYPSUM PLANK

A precast gypsum product used particularly for roof construction is composed of a
core of gypsum cast in the form of a plank, with wire-fabric reinforcement and
usually with tongue-and-groove metal edges and ends. The planks are available in
4.38                                SECTION FOUR


two thicknesses—a 2-in plank, which is 15 in wide and 10 ft long, and a 3-in plank
which is 12 in wide and 30 in long. (See ASTM C377.)



GLASS AND GLASS BLOCK

Glass is so widely used for decorative and utilitarian purposes in modern construc-
tion that it would require an encyclopedia to list all the varieties available. Clear
glass for windows and doors is made in varying thicknesses or strengths, also in
double layers to obtain additional thermal insulation. Safety glass, laminated from
sheets of glass and plastic, or made with embedded wire reinforcement, is available
for locations where breakage might be hazardous. For ornamental work, glass is
available in a wide range of textures, colors, finishes, and shapes.



4.31   WINDOW GLASS

Various types and grades of glass are used for glazing:

Clear Window Glass. This is the most extensively used type for windows in all
classes of buildings. A range of grades, as established by Federal Government
Standard DD-G-451c, classifies quality according to defects. The more commonly
used grades are A and B. A is used for the better class of buildings where appear-
ance is important, and B is used for industrial buildings, some low-cost residences,
basements, etc.
    With respect to thickness, clear window glass is classified as ‘‘single-strength’’
about 3⁄32 in thick; ‘‘double-strength,’’ about 1⁄8 in thick; and ‘‘heavy-sheet,’’ up to
7
 ⁄32 in thick. Maximum sizes are as follows: single-strength, 40 ⫻ 50 in; double-
strength, 60 ⫻ 80 in; and heavy sheet, 76 ⫻ 120 in. Because of flexibility, single
strength and double strength should never be used in areas exceeding 12 ft2, and
for appearance’s sake areas should not exceed 7 ft2.

Plate and Float Glass. These have, in general, the same performance character-
istics. They are of superior quality, more expensive, and have better appearance,
with no distortion of vision at any angle. Showcase windows, picture windows, and
exposed windows in offices and commercial buildings are usually glazed with pol-
ished plate or float glass. Thicknesses range from 1⁄8 to 7⁄8 in. There are two standard
qualities, silvering and glazing, the latter being employed for quality glazing.

Processed Glass and Rolled Figured Sheet. These are general classifications of
obscure glass. There are many patterns and varying characteristics. Some provide
true obscurity with a uniform diffusion and pleasing appearance, while others may
give a maximum transmission of light or a smoother surface for greater cleanliness.
The more popular types include a clear, polished surface on one side with a pattern
for obscurity on the other side.

Obscure Wired Glass. This usually is specified for its fire-retarding properties,
although it is also used in doors or windows where breakage is a problem. It should
not be used in pieces over 720 in2 in area (check local building code).
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.39


Polished Wired Glass. More expensive than obscure wired glass, polished wired
glass is used where clear vision is desired, such as in school or institutional doors.
   There are also many special glasses for specific purposes:

Heat-Absorbing Glass. This reduces heat, glare, and a large percentage of ultra-
violet rays, which bleach colored fabrics. It often is used for comfort and reduction
of air-conditioning loads where large areas of glass have a severe sun exposure.
Because of differential temperature stresses and expansion induced by heat absorp-
tion under severe sun exposure, special attention should be given to edge conditions.
Glass having clean-cut edges is particularly desirable, because these affect the edge
strength, which, in turn must resist the central-area expansion. A resilient glazing
material should be used.

Corrugated Glass, Wired Glass, and Plastic Panels. These are used for decorative
treatments, diffusing light, or as translucent structural panels with color.

Laminated Glass. This consists of two or more layers of glass laminated together
by one or more coatings or a transparent plastic. This construction adds strength.
Some types of laminated glass also provide a degree of security, sound isolation,
heat absorption, and glare reduction. Where color and privacy are desired, fade-
proof opaque colors can be included. When fractured, a laminated glass tends to
adhere to the inner layer of plastic and, therefore, shatters into small splinters, thus
minimizing the hazard of flying glass.

Bullet-Resisting Glass. This is made of three or more layers of plate glass lam-
inated under heat and pressure. Thicknesses of this glass vary from 3⁄4 to 3 in. The
more common thicknesses are 13⁄16 in, to resist medium-powered small arms: 11⁄2
in, to resist high-powered small arms; and 2 in, to resist rifles and submachine guns.
(Underwriters Laboratories lists materials having the required properties for various
degrees of protection.) Greater thicknesses are used for protection against armor-
piercing projectiles. Uses of bullet-resisting glass include cashier windows, bank
teller cages, toll-bridge booths, peepholes, and many industrial and military appli-
cations. Transparent plastics also are used as bullet-resistant materials, and some
of these materials have been tested by the Underwriters Laboratories. Thicknesses
of 11⁄4 in or more have met UL standards for resisting medium-powered small arms.

Tempered Glass. This is produced by a process of reheating and sudden cooling
that greatly increases strength. All cutting and fabricating must be done before
tempering. Doors of 1⁄2- and 3⁄4-in-thick tempered glass are commonly used for
commercial building. Other uses, with thicknesses from 1⁄8 to 7⁄8 in, include back-
boards for basketball, showcases, balustrades, sterilizing ovens, and windows,
doors, and mirrors in institutions. Although tempered glass is 41⁄2 to 5 times as
strong as annealed glass of the same thickness, it is breakable, and when broken,
disrupts into innumerable small fragments of more or less cubical shape.

Tinted and Coated Glasses. These are available in several types and for varied
uses. As well as decor, these uses can provide for light and heat reflection, lower
light transmission, greater safety, sound reduction, reduced glare, and increased
privacy.
4.40                                SECTION FOUR


Transparent Mirror Glass. This appears as a mirror when viewed from a brightly
lighted side, and is transparent to a viewer on the darker opposite side. This one-
way-vision glass is available as a laminate, plate or float, tinted, and in tempered
quality.

Plastic Window Glazing. Made of such plastics as acrylic or polycarbonate, plas-
tic glazing is used for urban school buildings and in areas where high vandalism
might be anticipated. These plastics have substantially higher impact strength than
glass or tempered glass. Allowance should be made in the framing and installation
for expansion and contraction of plastics, which may be about 8 times as much as
that of glass. Note also that the modulus of elasticity (stiffness) of plastics is about
one-twentieth that of glass. Standard sash, however, usually will accommodate the
additional thickness of plastic and have sufficient rabbet depth.

Suspended Glazing. This utilizes metal clamps bonded to tempered plate glass at
the top edge, with vertical glass supports at right angles for resistance to wind
pressure (Fig. 4.1). These vertical supports, called stabilizers, have their exposed
edges polished. The joints between the large plates and the stabilizers are sealed
with a bonding cement. The bottom edge or sill is held in position by a metal
channel, and sealed with resilient waterproofing. Suspended glazing offers much
greater latitude in use of glass and virtually eliminates visual barriers.

Safety Glazing. A governmental specification Z-97, adopted by many states, re-
quires entrance-way doors and appurtenances glazed with tempered, laminated, or
plastic material.



4.32   GLASS BLOCK

Glass blocks are made by first pressing or shaping half blocks to the desired form,
then fusing the half blocks to form a complete block. A block is usually 37⁄8 in
thick and 53⁄4, 73⁄4, or 113⁄4 in square. The center of the block is hollow and is
under a partial vacuum, which adds to the insulating properties of the block. Corner
and radial blocks are also available to produce desired architectural effects.
   Glass block is commonly laid up in a cement or a cement-lime mortar. Since
there is no absorption by the block to facilitate bond of mortar, various devices are
employed to obtain a mechanical bond. One such device is to coat the sides of the
block with a plastic and embed therein particles of sand. The difficulty in obtaining
permanent and complete bond sometimes leads to the opening up of mortar joints.
A wall of glass block, exposed to the weather, may leak badly in a rainstorm unless
unusual precautions have been taken during the setting of the block to obtain full
and complete bond.
   Glass blocks have a coefficient of thermal expansion that is from 11⁄2 to 2 times
that of other masonry. For this reason, large areas of block may expand against
solid masonry and develop sufficient stress so that the block will crack. Manufac-
turers usually recommend an expansion joint every 10 ft or so, to prevent building
up of pressure sufficient to crack the block. With adequate protection against ex-
pansion and with good workmanship, or with walls built in protected locations,
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                                       4.41




      FIGURE 4.1 Typical details of suspended glazing.   (F. H. Sparks, Co., Inc., New
      York.)



glass-block walls are ornamental, sanitary, excellent light transmitters, and have
rather low thermal conductivity.



WOOD

Wood is a building material made from trees. It is a natural polymer composed of
cells in the shape of long, thin tubes with tapered ends. The cell wall consists of
cellulose crystals, which are bonded together by a complex amorphous lignin com-
posed of carbohydrates. Most of the cells in a tree trunk are oriented vertically.
Consequently, properties of wood in the direction of cell axes, usually referred to
  TABLE 4.14 Strength of Some Commercially Important Woods Grown in the United States*
  (Results of Tests on Small, Clear Specimens†)

                                                                                               Compression        Shear
                                                                               Compression     perpendicular   parallel to
                                                                                parallel to       to grain,       grain,          Side
                                                          Modulus of               grain,           fiber      maximum         hardness,
                                                                                maximum           stress at     shearing          load
                                    Specific      Rupture,       Elasticity,     crushing       proportional    strength,    perpendicular
  Commercial name of species        gravity         ksi             ksi        strength, psi     limit, psi        psi        to grain, lb
  Ash, white                          0.55          9.6            1440            3,900            670          1380             960
                                      0.60         15.4            1740            7,410           1160          1950            1320
  Beech, American                     0.56          8.6            1380            3,550            540          1290             850
                                      0.64         14.9            1720            7,300           1010          2010            1300
  Birch, yellow                       0.55          8.3            1500            3,380            430          1110             780
                                      0.62         16.6            2010            8,170            970          1880            1260
  Cedar, western red                  0.31          5.2             940            2,770            240           770             260
                                      0.32          7.5            1110            4,560            460           990             350
  Chestnut, American                  0.40          5.6             930            2,470            310           800             420
                                      0.43          8.6            1230            5,230            620          1080             540
  Cypress, bald                       0.42          6.6            1180            3,580            400           810             390
                                      0.46         10.6            1440            6,360            730          1000             510
  Douglas fir, coast                  0.45          7.7            1560            3,780            380           900             500
                                      0.48         12.4            1950            7,240            800          1130             710
  Douglas fir, interior, west         0.46          7.7            1510            3,870            420           940             510
                                      0.50         12.6            1820            7,440            760          1290             660
  Elm, American                       0.46          7.2            1110            2,910            360          1000             620
                                      0.50         11.8            1340            5,520            690          1510             830
  Hemlock, eastern                    0.38          6.4            1070            3,080            360           850             400
                                      0.40          8.9            1200            5,410            650          1060             500
  Hemlock, western                    0.42          6.6            1310            3,360            280           860             410
                                      0.45         11.3            1640            7,110            550          1250             540
  Hickory, pecan                      0.60          9.8            1370            3,990            780          1480            1310
                                      0.66         13.7            1730            7,850           1720          2080            1820
4.42
 TABLE 4.14 Strength of Some Commercially Important Woods Grown in the United States* (Continued)
 (Results of Tests on Small, Clear Specimens†)

                                                                                                                     Compression        Shear
                                                                                                     Compression     perpendicular   parallel to
                                                                                                      parallel to       to grain,       grain,          Side
                                                                        Modulus of                       grain,           fiber      maximum         hardness,
                                                                                                      maximum           stress at     shearing          load
                                             Specific          Rupture,          Elasticity,           crushing       proportional    strength,    perpendicular
 Commercial name of species                  gravity             ksi                ksi              strength, psi     limit, psi        psi        to grain, lb
 Locust, black                                 0.66              13.8               1850                  6,800          1160          1760            1570
                                               0.69              19.4               2050                 10,180          1830          2480            1700
 Larch, western                                0.48               4.9                960                  3,760           400           870             510
                                               0.52              13.1               1870                  7,640           930          1360             830
 Maple, sugar                                  0.56               9.4               1550                  4,020           640          1460             970
                                               0.63              15.8               1830                  7,830          1470          2330            1450
 Oak, northern red                             0.56               8.3               1350                  3,440           610          1210            1000
                                               0.63              14.3               1820                  6,760          1010          1780            1290
 Oak, white                                    0.60               8.3               1250                  3,560           670          1250            1060
                                               0.68              15.2               1780                  7,440          1070          2000            1360
 Pine shortleaf                                0.47               7.4               1390                  3,530           350           910             440
                                               0.51              13.1               1750                  7,270           820          1390             690
 Pine, longleaf                                0.54               8.5               1590                  4,320           480          1040             590
                                               0.59              14.5               1980                  8,470           960          1510             870
 Pine, sugar                                   0.34               4.9               1030                  2,460           210           720             270
                                               0.36               8.2               1190                  4,460           500          1130             380
 Pine, western white                           0.35               4.7               1190                  2,430           190           680             260
                                               0.38               9.7               1460                  5,040           470          1040             420
 Yellow poplar                                 0.40               6.0               1220                  2,660           270           790             440
                                               0.42              10.1               1580                  5,540           500          1190             540
 Redwood, old growth                           0.38               7.5               1180                  4,200           420           800             410
                                               0.40              10.0               1340                  6,150           700           940             480
 Spruce, white                                 0.37               5.6               1070                  2,570           240           690             320
                                               0.40               9.8               1340                  5,470           460          1080             480
 Tupelo, black                                 0.46               7.0               1030                  3,040           480          1100             640
                                               0.50               9.6               1200                  5,520           930          1340             810
       * From U.S. Forest Products Laboratory.
       † Values in first line are for green material. Values in second line are adjusted to 12% moisture content.
4.43
4.44                                 SECTION FOUR


as longitudinal, or parallel to grain, differ from those in the other (radial or circum-
ferential) directions, or across the grain.


4.33   MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF WOOD

Because of its structure, wood has different strength properties parallel and per-
pendicular to the grain. Tensile, bending, and compressive strengths are greatest
parallel to the grain and least across the grain, whereas shear strength is least
parallel to the grain and greatest across the grain. Except in plywood, the shearing
strength of wood is usually governed by the parallel-to-grain direction.
    The compressive strength of wood at an angle other than parallel or perpendic-
ular to the grain is given by the following formula:
                                             C2C2
                             C␪ ⫽                                                 (4.2)
                                    C1 sin2 ␪ ⫹ C2 cos2 ␪
in which C␪ is the strength at the desired angle ␪ with the grain, C1 is the com-
pressive strength parallel to grain, and C2 is the compressive strength perpendicular
to the grain.
    Increasing moisture content reduces all strength properties except impact bend-
ing, in which green wood is stronger than dry wood. The differences are brought
out in Table 4.14. In practice, no differentiation is made between the strength of
green and dry wood in engineering timbers, because of seasoning defects that may
occur in timbers as they dry and because large timbers normally are put into service
without having been dried. This is not true of laminated timber, in which dry wood
must be employed to obtain good glued joints. For laminated timber, higher stresses
can be employed than for ordinary lumber. In general, compression and bending
parallel to the grain are affected most severely by moisture, whereas modulus of
elasticity, shear, and tensile strength are affected less. In practice, tensile strength
parallel to the grain is taken equal to the bending strength of wood.
    In Table 4.14 are summarized also the principal mechanical properties of the
most important American commercial species.
    Values given in the table are average ultimate strengths. To obtain working
stresses from these, the following must be considered: (1) Individual pieces may
vary 25% above and below the average. (2) Values given are for standard tests that
are completed in a few minutes. Over a period of years, however, wood may fail
under a continuous load about 9⁄16 that sustained in a standard test. (3) The modulus
of rupture of a standard 2-in-deep flexural-test specimen is greater than that of a
deep beam. In deriving working stresses, therefore, variability, probable duration
of load, and size are considered, and reduction factors are applied to the average
ultimate strengths to provide basic stresses, or working stresses, for blemishless
lumber. These stresses are still further reduced to account for such blemishes as
knots, wane, slope of grain, shakes, and checks, to provide working stresses for
classes of commercial engineering timbers. (See Sec. 10 for engineering design in
timber.)


4.34   EFFECTS OF HYGROSCOPIC PROPERTIES
       OF WOOD

Because of its nature, wood tends to absorb moisture from the air when the relative
humidity is high, and to lose it when the relative humidity is low. Moisture imbibed
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.45


into the cell walls causes the wood to shrink and swell as the moisture content
changes with the relative humidity of the surrounding air. The maximum amount
of imbibed moisture the cell walls can hold is known as the fiber-saturation point,
and for most species is in the vicinity of 25 to 30% of the oven-dry weight of the
wood. Free water held in the cell cavities above the fiber-saturation point has no
effect upon shrinkage or other properties of the wood. Changes in moisture content
below the fiber-saturation point cause negligible shrinkage or swelling along the
grain, and such shrinkage and swelling are normally ignored; but across the grain,
considerable shrinkage and swelling occur in both the radial and tangential direc-
tion. Tangential shrinkage (as in flat-cut material) is normally approximately 50%
greater than radial shrinkage (as in edge-grain material). See also Art. 10.1.
    Separation of grain, or checking, is the result of rapid lowering of surface mois-
ture content combined with a difference in moisture content between inner and
outer portions of the piece. As wood loses moisture to the surrounding atmosphere,
the outer cells of the member lose at a more rapid rate than the inner cells. As the
outer cells try to shrink, they are restrained by the inner portion of the member.
The more rapid the drying, the greater will be the differential in shrinkage between
outer and inner fibers, and the greater the shrinkage stresses. As a result, checks
may develop into splits.
    Checks are radial cracks caused by nonuniform drying of wood. A split is a
crack that results from complete separation of the wood fibers across the thickness
of a member and extends parallel to the grain. (Shakes are another type of defect.
Usually parallel to an annular ring, they develop in standing trees, whereas checks
and splits are seasoning defects.) Lumber grading rules limit these types of defects.
    Checks affect the horizontal shear strength of timber. A large reduction factor
is applied to test values in establishing design values, in recognition of stress con-
centrations at the ends of checks. Design values for horizontal shear are adjusted
for permissible checking in the various stress grades at the time of the grading.
Since strength properties of wood increase with dryness, checks may enlarge with
increasing dryness after shipment, without appreciably reducing shear strength.
    Cross-grain checks and splits that tend to run out the side of a piece, or excessive
checks and splits that tend to enter connection areas, may be serious and may
require servicing. Provisions for controlling the effects of checking in connection
areas may be incorporated in design details.
    To avoid excessive splitting between rows of bolts caused by shrinkage during
seasoning of solid-sawn timbers, rows should not be spaced more than 5 in apart,
or a saw kerf, terminating in a bored hole, should be provided between lines of
bolts. Whenever possible, maximum end distances for connections should be spec-
ified to minimize the effect of checks running into the joint area. Some designers
requires stitch bolts in members, with multiple connections loaded at an angle to
the grain. Stitch bolts, kept tight, will reinforce pieces where checking is excessive.
    One of the principal advantages of glued-laminated timber construction is rela-
tive freedom from checking. Seasoning checks may, however, occur in laminated
members for the same reasons that they exist in solid-sawn members. When lam-
inated members are glued within the typical range of moisture contents of 7 to 16%
for the laminating lumber at the time of gluing, they will approximate the moisture
content in normal-use conditions, thereby minimizing checking. Moisture content
of the lumber at the time of gluing is thus of great importance to the control of
checking in service. However, rapid changes in moisture content of large wood
sections after gluing will result in shrinkage or swelling of the wood, and during
shrinking, checking may develop in both glued joints and wood.
    Differentials in shrinkage rates of individual laminations tend to concentrate
shrinkage stresses at or near the glue line. For this reason, when checking occurs,
4.46                               SECTION FOUR


it is usually at or near glue lines. The presence of wood-fiber separation indicates
adequate glue bonds, and not delamination.
    In general, checks have very little effect on the strength of glued-laminated
members. Laminations in such members are thin enough to season readily in kiln
drying without developing checks. Since checks lie in a radial plane, and the ma-
jority of laminations are essentially flat grain, checks are so positioned in horizon-
tally laminated members that they will not materially affect shear strength. When
members are designed with laminations vertical (with wide face parallel to the
direction of load application), and when checks may affect the shear strength, the
effect of checks may be evaluated in the same manner as for checks in solid-sawn
members.
    Seasoning checks in bending members affect only the horizontal shear strength
(Art. 10.5.13). They are usually not of structural importance unless the checks are
significant in depth and occur in the midheight of the member near the support,
and then only if shear governs the design of the members. The reduction in shear
strength is nearly directly proportional to the ratio of depth of check to width of
beam. Checks in columns are not of structural importance unless the check develops
into a split, thereby increasing the slenderness ratio of columns.
    Minor checking may be disregarded, since there is ample safety factor in allow-
able design values. The final decision as to whether shrinkage checks are detri-
mental to the strength requirements of any particular design or structural member
should be made by a competent engineer experienced in timber construction.



4.35   COMMERCIAL GRADES OF WOOD

Lumber is graded by the various associations of lumber manufacturers having ju-
risdiction over various species. Two principal sets of grading rules are employed:
(1) for softwoods, and (2) for hardwoods.

Softwoods. Softwood lumber is classified as dry, moisture content 19% or less;
and green, moisture content above 19%.
   According to the American Softwood Lumber Standard, softwoods are classified
according to use as:
   Yard Lumber. Lumber of grades, sizes, and patterns generally intended for or-
dinary construction and general building purposes.
   Structural Lumber. Lumber 2 in or more nominal thickness and width for use
where working stresses are required.
   Factory and Shop Lumber. Lumber produced or selected primarily for manu-
facturing purposes.
   Softwoods are classified according to extent of manufacture as:
   Rough Lumber. Lumber that has not been dressed (surfaced) but has been
sawed, edged, and trimmed.
   Dressed (Surfaced ) Lumber. Lumber that has been dressed by a planning ma-
chine (for the purpose of attaining smoothness of surface and uniformity of size)
on one side (S1S), two sides (S2S), one edge (S1E), two edges (S2E), or a com-
bination of sides and edges (S1S1E, S1S2, S2S1E, S4S).
   Worked Lumber. Lumber that, in addition to being dressed, has been matched,
shiplapped or patterned:
   Matched Lumber. Lumber that has been worked with a tongue on one edge of
each piece and a groove on the opposite edge.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.47


    Shiplapped Lumber. Lumber that has been worked or rabbeted on both edges,
to permit formation of a close-lapped joint.
    Patterned Lumber. Lumber that is shaped to a pattern or to a molded form.
    Softwoods are also classified according to nominal size:
    Boards. Lumber less than 2 in in nominal thickness and 2 in or more in nom-
inal width. Boards less than 6 in in nominal width may be classified as strips.
    Dimension. Lumber from 2 in to, but not including, 5 in in nominal thickness,
and 2 in or more in nominal width. Dimension may be classified as framing, joists,
planks, rafters, studs, small timbers, etc.
    Timbers. Lumber 5 in or more nominally in least dimension. Timber may be
classified as beams, stringers, posts, caps, sills, girders, purlins, etc.
    Actual sizes of lumber are less than the nominal sizes, because of shrinkage and
dressing. In general, dimensions of dry boards, dimension lumber, and timber less
than 2 in wide or thick are 1⁄4 in less than nominal; from 2 to 7 in wide or thick,
1
 ⁄2 in less, and above 6 in wide or thick, 3⁄4 in less. Green-lumber less than 2 in
wide or thick is 1⁄32 in more than dry; from 2 to 4 in wide or thick, 1⁄16 in more, 5
and 6 in wide or thick, 1⁄8 in more, and 8 in or above in width and thickness, 1⁄4
in more than dry lumber. There are exceptions, however.
    Yard lumber is classified on the basis of quality as:
    Appearance. Lumber is good appearance and finishing qualities, often called
select.

   Suitable for natural finishes
     Practically clear
     Generally clear and of high quality
   Suitable for paint finishes
     Adapted to high-quality paint finishes
     Intermediate between high-finishing grades and common grades, and partak-
     ing somewhat of the nature of both
   Common. Lumber suitable for general construction and utility purposes, often
given various commercial designations.

   For standard construction use
     Suitable for better-type construction purposes
     Well adapted for good standard construction
     Designed for low-cost temporary construction
   For less exacting purposes
     Low quality, but usable

   Structural lumber is assigned modulus of elasticity values and working stresses
in bending, compression parallel to grain, compression perpendicular to grain, and
horizontal shear in accordance with ASTM procedures. These values take into ac-
count such factors as sizes and locations of knots, slope of grain, wane, and shakes
or checks, as well as such other pertinent features as rate of growth and proportions
of summerwood.
   Factory and shop lumber is graded with reference to its use for doors and sash,
or on the basis of characteristics affecting its use for general cut-up purposes, or
on the basis of size of cutting. The grade of factory and shop lumber is determined
by the percentage of the area of each board or plank available in cuttings of spec-
4.48                                SECTION FOUR


ified or of given minimum sizes and qualities. The grade of factory and shop lumber
is determined from the poor face, although the quality of both sides of each cutting
must be considered.

Hardwoods. Because of the great diversity of applications for hardwood both in
and outside the construction industry, hardwood grading rules are based on the
proportion of a given piece that can be cut into smaller pieces of material clear on
one or both sides and not less than a specified size. Grade classifications are there-
fore based on the amount of clear usable lumber in a piece.
    Special grading rules of interest in the construction industry cover hardwood
interior trim and moldings, in which one face must be practically free of imperfec-
tions and in which Grade A may further limit the amount of sapwood as well as
stain. Hardwood dimension rules, in addition, cover clears, which must be clear
both faces; clear one face; paint quality, which can be covered with pain; core,
which must be sound on both faces and suitable for cores of glued-up panels; and
sound, which is a general-utility grade.
    Hardwood flooring is graded under two separate sets of rules: (1) for maple,
birch, and beech; and (2) for red and white oak and pecan. In both sets of rules,
color and quality classifications range from top-quality to the lower utility grades.
Oak may be further subclassified as quarter-sawed and plain-sawed. In all grades,
top-quality material must be uniformed in color, whereas other grades place no
limitation on color.
    Shingles are graded under special rules, usually into three classes: Number 1,
2, and 3. Number 1 must be all edge grain and strictly clear, containing no sapwood.
Numbers 2 and 3 must be clear to a distance far enough away from the butt to be
well covered by the next course of shingles.



4.36   DESTROYERS AND PRESERVATIVES

The principal destroyers of wood are decay, caused by fungus, and attack by a
number of animal organisms of which termites, carpenter ants, grubs of a wide
variety of beetles, teredo, and limnoria are the principal offenders. In addition, fire
annually causes widespread destruction of wood structures.
    Decay will not occur if wood is kept well ventilated and air-dry or, conversely,
if it is kept continuously submerged so that air is excluded.
    Most termites in the United States are subterranean and require contact with the
soil. The drywood and dampwood termites found along the southern fringes of the
country and along the west coast, however, do not require direct soil contact and
are more difficult to control.
    Teredo, limnoria, and other water-borne wood destroyers are found only in salt
or brackish waters.
    Various wood species vary in natural durability and resistance to decay and
insect attack. The sapwood of all species is relatively vulnerable; only the heart-
wood can be considered to be resistant. Table 4.15 lists the common species in
accordance with heartwood resistance. Such a list is only approximate, and indi-
vidual pieces deviate considerably.
    Preservatives employed to combat the various destructive agencies may be sub-
divided into oily, water-soluble salts, and solvent-soluble organic materials. The
principal oily preservatives are coal-tar creosote and creosote mixed with petroleum.
                                        BUILDING MATERIALS                                          4.49


TABLE 4.15 Resistance to Decay of Heartwood of Domestic Woods

                                             Moderately                            Slightly or
Resistant or very resistant                   resistant                            nonresistant
Baldcypress (old growth)*          Baldcypress (young growth)*            Alder
Catalpa                            Douglas fir                            Ashes
Cedars                             Honeylocust                            Aspens
Cherry, black                      Larch, western                         Basswood
Chestnut                           Oak, swamp chestnut                    Beech
Cypress, Arizona                   Pine, eastern white*                   Birches
Junipers                           Souther pine:                          Buckeye
Locust, black†                       Longleaf*                            Butternut
Mesquite                             Slash*                               Cottonwood
Mulbery, red†                      Tamarack                               Elms
Oak:                                                                      Hackberry
  Bur                                                                     Hemlocks
  Chesnut                                                                 Hickories
  Gambel                                                                  Magnolia
  Orgeon white                                                            Maples
  Post                                                                    Oak (red and black species)
  White                                                                   Pines (other than longleaf,
Osage orange†                                                               slash, and eastern white)
Redwood                                                                   Poplars
Sassafras                                                                 Spruces
Walnut, black                                                             Sweetgum
Yew, Pacific†                                                             True firs (western and
                                                                            eastern)
                                                                          Willows
                                                                          Yellow poplar
    * The southern and eastern pines and baldcypress are now largely second growth with a large proportion
of sapwood. Consequently, substantial quantities of heartwood lumber of these species are not available.
    † These woods have exceptionally high decay resistance.
    From U.S. Forest Products Laboratory.



The most commonly employed water-soluble salts are acid copper chromate, chro-
mated copper arsenate and arsenite, fluor chrome arsenate phenol, chromated zinc
chloride, and other materials that are often sold under various proprietary names.
The principal solvent-soluble organic materials are chlorinated phenols, such as
pentachlorphenol, and copper naphthenate.
   Preservatives may be applied in a variety of ways, including brushing and dip-
ping, but for maximum treatment, pressure is required to provide deep side-grain
penetration. Butts of poles and other parts are sometimes placed in a hot boiling
creosote or salt solution, and after the water in the wood has been converted to
steam, they are quickly transferred to a cold vat of the same preservative. As the
steam condenses, it produces a partial vacuum, which draws the preservative fairly
deeply into the surface.
   Pressure treatments may be classified as full-cell and empty-cell. In the full-cell
treatment, a partial vacuum is first drawn in the pressure-treating tank to withdraw
most of the air in the cells of the wood. The preservative is then let in without
breaking the vacuum, after which pressure is applied to the hot solution. After
treatment is completed, the individual cells are presumably filled with preservative.
In the empty-cell method, no initial vacuum is drawn, but the preservative is
4.50                               SECTION FOUR


pumped in under pressure against the back pressure of the compressed air in the
wood. When the pressure is released, the air in the wood expands and forces out
excess preservative, leaving only a coating of preservative on the cell walls.
   Retentions of preservative depend on the application. For teredo-infestation, full-
cell creosote treatment to refusal may be specified, ranging from 16 to 20 lb per
cubic foot of wood. For ordinary decay conditions and resistance to termites and
other destroyers of a similar nature, the empty-cell method may be employed with
retentions in the vicinity of 6 to 8 lb of creosote per cubic foot of wood. Salt
retentions generally range in the vicinity of 11⁄2 to 3 lb of dry salt retained per
cubic food of wood.
   Solvent-soluble organic materials, such as pentachlorphenol, are commonly em-
ployed for the treatment of sash and door parts to impart greater resistance to decay.
This is commonly done by simply dipping the parts in the solution and then allow-
ing them to dry. As the organic solvent evaporates, it leaves the water-insoluble
preservative behind in the wood.
   These organic materials are also employed for general preservative treatment,
including fence posts and structural lumber. The water-soluble salts and solvent-
soluble organic architects leave the wood clean and paintable. Creosote in general
cannot be painted over, although partial success can be achieved with top-quality
aluminum-flake pigment paints.
   Treatment against fire consists generally of applying salts containing ammonium
and phosphates, of which monoammonium phosphate and diammonium phosphate
are widely employed. At retentions of 3 to 5 lb of dry salt per cubic foot, the wood
does not support its own combustion, and the afterglow when fire is removed is
short. A variety of surface treatments is also available, most of which depend on
the formation of a blanket of inert-gas bubbles over the surface of the wood in the
presence of flame or other sources of heat. The blanket of bubbles insulates the
wood beneath and retards combustion.
   See also Art. 10.6.



4.37   GLUES AND ADHESIVES FOR WOOD

A variety of adhesives is now available for use with wood, depending on the final
application. The older adhesives include animal glue, casein glue, and a variety of
vegetable glues, of which soybean is today the most important. Animal glues pro-
vide strong, tough, easily made joints, which, however, are not moisture-resistant.
Casein mixed with cold water, when properly formulated, provides highly moisture-
resistant glue joints, although they cannot be called waterproof. The vegetable glues
have good dry strength but are not moisture-resistant.
   The principal high-strength glues today are synthetic resins, of which phenol
formaldehyde, urea formaldehyde, resorcinol formaldehyde, melamine formalde-
hyde, and epoxy are the most important. Phenol, resorcinol, and melamine provide
glue joints that are completely waterproof and will not separate when properly made
even on boiling. Urea formaldehyde provides a glue joint of high moisture resis-
tance, although not quite so good as the other three. Phenol and melamine require
application of heat, as well as pressure, to cure the adhesive. Urea and resorcinol,
however, can be formulated to be mixed with water at ordinary temperatures and
hardened without application of heat above room temperature. Waterproof plywood
is commonly made in hot-plate presses with phenolic or melamine adhesive. Re-
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                 4.51


sorcinol is employed where heat cannot be applied, as in a variety of assembly
operations and the manufacture of laminated parts like ships’ keels, which must
have the maximum in waterproof qualities. Epoxide resins provide strong joints.
Adhesives containing an elastomeric material, such as natural or synthetic rubber,
may be classified as contact or mastic. The former, applied to both mating surfaces
and allowed to partly dry, permit adhesion on contact. Mastics are very viscous and
applied with a trowel or putty knife. They may be used to set wood-block flooring.
   An emulsion of polyvinyl acetate serves as a general-purpose adhesive, for gen-
eral assembly operations where maximum strength and heat or moisture resistance
are not required. This emulsion is merely applied to the surfaces to be bonded,
after which they are pressed together and the adhesive is allowed to harden.



4.38    PLYWOOD AND OTHER FABRICATED
        WOOD BOARDS

As ordinarily made, plywood consists of thin sheets, or veneers, of wood glued
together. The grain is oriented at right angles in adjacent plies. To obtain plywood
with balance—that is, which will not warp, shrink, or twist unduly—the plies must
be carefully selected and arranged to be mirror images of each other with respect
to the central plane. The outside plies or faces are parallel to each other and are of
species that have the same shrinkage characteristics. The same holds true of the
cross bands. As a consequence, plywood has an odd number of plies, the minimum
being three.
    Principal advantages of plywood over lumber are its more nearly equal strength
properties in length and width, greater resistance to checking, greatly reduced
shrinkage and swelling, and resistance to splitting.
    The approach to equalization of strength of plywood in the various directions is
obtained at the expense of strength in the parallel-to-grain direction; i.e., plywood
is not so strong in the direction parallel to its face plies as lumber is parallel to the
grain. But plywood is considerably stronger in the direction perpendicular to its
face plies than wood is perpendicular to the grain. Furthermore, the shearing
strength of plywood in a plane perpendicular to the plane of the plywood is very
much greater than that of ordinary wood parallel to the grain. In a direction parallel
to the plane of the plywood, however, the shearing strength of plywood is less than
that of ordinary wood parallel to the grain, because in this direction rolling shear
occurs in the plywood; i.e., the fibers in one ply tend to roll rather than to slide.
    Depending on whether plywood is to be used for general utility or for decorative
purposes, the veneers employed may be cut by peeling from the log, by slicing, or
today very rarely, by sawing. Sawing and slicing give the greatest freedom and
versatility in the selection of grain. Peeling provides the greatest volume and the
most rapid production, because logs are merely rotated against a flat knife and the
veneer is peeled off in a long continuous sheet.
    Plywood is classified as interior or exterior, depending on the type of adhesive
employed. Interior-grade plywood must have a reasonable degree of moisture re-
sistance but is not considered to be waterproof. Exterior-grade plywood must be
completely waterproof and capable of withstanding immersion in water or pro-
longed exposure to outdoor conditions.
    In addition to these classifications, plywood is further subclassified in a variety
of ways depending on the quality of the surface ply. Top quality is clear on one or
4.52                               SECTION FOUR


both faces, except for occasional patches. Lower qualities permit sound defects,
such as knots and similar blemishes, which do not detract from the general utility
of the plywood but detract from its finished appearance.

Particle Board. Wood chips, sawdust, and flakes are pressed with a binder (urea-
formaldehyde or phenol-formaldehyde) to form boards (sheathing, underlayment,
corestock), having uniform strength and low shrinkage in the plane of the board.

Hardboard. Wood chips (exploded by high-pressure steam into wood fibers) and
lignin are pressed to form boards of various densities. Additives may add weather
resistance and other properties.



4.39   WOOD BIBLIOGRAPHY

Forest Products Laboratory, Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture: ‘‘Wood
Handbook,’’ Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
   National Hardwood Lumber Association, Chicago, Ill.: ‘‘Rules for the Measure-
ment and Inspection of Hardwood Lumber, Cypress, Veneer, and Thin Lumber.’’
   American Forest and Paper Association, Washington, D.C.: ‘‘National Design
Specification for Wood Construction.’’
   U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, Washington,
D.C.: American Softwood Lumber Standard, Voluntary Practice Standard PS20;
Douglas Fir Plywood, Commercial Standard CS 45; Hardwood Plywood, Com-
mercial Standard CS 35.
   Western Wood Products Association, Portland, Ore.: ‘‘Western Woods Use
Book.’’
   K. F. Faherty and T. G. Williamson, ‘‘Wood Engineering and Construction Hand-
book,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.



STEEL AND STEEL ALLOYS

Iron and its alloys are generally referred to as ferrous metals. Even small amounts
of alloy change the properties of ferrous metals significantly. Also, the properties
can be changed considerably by changing the atomic structure of these metals by
heating and cooling.



4.40   TYPES OF IRONS AND STEELS

Steel is a solution of carbon in iron. Various types of steel are produced by varying
the percentage of carbon added to molten iron and controlling the cooling, which
affects the atomic structure of the product, and hence its properties. Some of the
structural changes can be explained with the aid of an iron-carbon equilibrium
diagram (Fig. 4.2).
                                                             BUILDING MATERIALS                                             4.53


 TEMPERATURE, DEG F   3000




                                          AUSTENITE
                      2000




                                                                                                             LEDEBURITE
                                                                                                              EUTECTIC
                                       SOLID SOLUTION OF
                                        CARBON IN GAMMA                      AUSTENITE, LEDEBURITE
                                         A3   IRON     m                        AND CEMENTITE
                                                     Ac AUSTENITE
                                         A1         AND CEMENTITE
                                      FERRITE &
                                                        A1,3
                                     AUSTENITE




                                                                                                                          IRON CARBIDE
                      1000




                                                                                                                            CEMENTITE
                                     FERRITE           PEARLITE
                                              EUTECTOID
                                               PEARLITE




                                       PLUS              PLUS                CEMENTITE, PEARLITE AND
                                                                            TRANSFORMED LEDEBURITE
                             IRONS




                                     PEARLITE         CEMENTITE


                                       HYPO-               HYPER-                 CAST IRONS
                                     EUTECTOID            EUTECTOID
                        0             STEELS               STEELS
                                             0.80                                                            4.30
                                                1.0                   2.0        3.0                   4.0                5.0
                                                                      PERCENT CARBON
 FIGURE 4.2 Iron-carbon diagram.



4.40.1                   Iron-Carbon Equilibrium Diagram

The iron-carbon equilibrium diagram in Fig. 4.2 shows that, under equilibrium
conditions (slow cooling) if not more than 2.0% carbon is present, a solid solution
of carbon in gamma iron exists at elevated temperatures. This is called austenite.
If the carbon content is less than 0.8%, cooling below the A3 temperature line causes
transformation of some of the austenite to ferrite, which is substantially pure alpha
iron (containing less than 0.01% carbon in solution). Still further cooling to below
the A1 line causes the remaining austenite to transform to pearlite—the eutectoid
mixture of fine plates, or lamellas, of ferrite and cementite (iron carbide) whose
iridescent appearance under the microscope gives it its name.
    If the carbon content is 0.8%, no transformation on cooling the austenite occurs
until the A1 temperature is reached. At that point, all the austenite transforms to
pearlite, with its typical ‘‘thumbprint’’ microstructure.
    At carbon contents between 0.80 and 2.0%, cooling below the Acm temperature
line causes iron carbide, or cementite, to form in the temperature range between
Acm and A1,3. Below A1,3, the remaining austenite transforms to pearlite.


4.40.2                   Types of Irons

Metals containing substantially no carbon (several hundredths of 1%) are called
irons, of which wrought iron, electrolytic iron, and ‘‘ingot’’ iron are examples.
   Wrought iron, whether made by the traditional puddling method or by mixing
very low carbon iron and slag, contains a substantial amount of slag. Because it
contains very little carbon, it is soft, ductile, and tough and, like low-carbon ferrous
metals generally, is relatively resistant to corrosion. It is easily worked. When bro-
ken, it shows a fibrous fracture because of the slag inclusions. ‘‘Ingot’’ iron is a
very low carbon iron containing no slag, which is also soft, ductile, and tough.
       TABLE 4.16 ASTM Requirements for Structural, Reinforcing, and Fastening Steels*

                                              Tensile                                                           Bend test, ratio of bend diameter,
                                  ASTM       strength,    Yield                          Elongation              in, to specimen thickness, in§
                                  specifi-     min,       point,     Elongation in        in 2 in,
                                   cation       ksi†     min, ksi†   8 in, min, %         min, %‡     0–3⁄4      3
                                                                                                                     ⁄4–1        1–11⁄2    11⁄2–2      Over 2
                                                                                                       1                           1             1
       Structural steel             A36       58–80         36            20               23–21           ⁄2        1            1 ⁄2          2 ⁄2     3
       Welded or seamless           A53       45–60       25–35
         pipe
       High-strength, low-        A242        63–70       42–50           18                21         1          11⁄2             2            21⁄2     3
         alloy, structural
         steel
       High-strength, low-        A572        60–80       42–65          20–15             24–17                            Depends on grade*
         alloy columbium-
         vanadium steels
       High-strength, low-        A588        63–70       42–50           18                21         1          11⁄2             2            21⁄2     3
4.54




         alloy structural steel
       High-yield-strength,       A514       110–130      90–100                           17–18       2             2             3             4       4
         quenched and
         tempered alloy steel
       Structural steel           A529        60–85         42            19                           1
       High-strength,             A852        90–110        70            19
         quenched and
         tempered alloy steel
       Normalized high-           A633        63–100      42–60           18                23         2             2            21⁄2          21⁄2     3
         strength low-alloy
         steel
       Quenched and               A678        70–110      50–75                            22–18      1–2         2–3             2–3      21⁄2–3      2–21⁄2
         tempered steel plate
       Cold-formed, welded        A500        45–62       33–46                            25–14
         and seamless tubing
       Hot-formed, welded         A501          58          36            20                23
         and seamless tubing
       High-strength steel        A325         105          81                              14
         bolts
TABLE 4.16        ASTM Requirements for Structural, Reinforcing, and Fastening Steels* (Continued)

                                               Tensile                                                                         Bend test, ratio of bend diameter,
                                ASTM          strength,        Yield                                Elongation                  in, to specimen thickness, in§
                                specifi-        min,           point,          Elongation in         in 2 in,
                                 cation          ksi†         min, ksi†        8 in, min, %          min, %‡           0–3⁄4     3
                                                                                                                                     ⁄4–1   1–11⁄2      11⁄2–2         Over 2
High-strength, alloy             A490         150–170         115–130                                    14
  steel bolts
Bolts and nuts,                  A307          60–100                                                    18
  machine
Sheetpiling                      A328            70               39                 17                                    2
Cast steel, 65–35,                A27          60–70            30–40                                  22–24
  annealed
High-strength cast               A148          80–260           40–210                                  18–3
  steel, 80–50
                                                                                                                               180⬚ bend test; ratio of pin diameter
Reinforcing steel for                                                                                                                 to specimen diameter
  concrete:
  Billet-steel bars              A615                                                                                  Under No. 6: 4; Nos. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11: 5
    Grade 40                                      70              40                 7–11
    Grade 60                                      90              60                 7–9                               Under No. 6: 4; No. 6: 5; Nos. 7, 8: 6;
                                                                                                                       Nos. 9, 10, 11: 8
  Rail-steel bars                A616
    Grade 50                                      80              50                 5–6                               Under No. 8: 6; Nos. 9, 10, 11: 8‫ن‬
    Grade 60                                      90              60               4.5–6                               Under No. 8: 6; Nos. 9, 10, 11: 8‫ن‬
    * The following are appropriate values for all the steels:
      Modulus of elasticity—29,000 ksi
      Shear modulus—11,000 ksi
      Poisson’s ratio—0.30
      Yield stress in shear—0.57Ft, where Ft ⫽ tensile stress
      Ultimate strength in shear—0.67Ft to 0.75Ft
      Coefficient of thermal expansion—0.0000065 in / in 䡠 ⬚F for temperatures between ⫺60 and 150⬚F
      Density—490 lb / ft3
    † Where two values are given, the first is the minimum and the second is the maximum. See the relevant specification
for the values for each grade and applicable thicknesses.
    ‡ The minimum elongations are modified for some thicknesses in accordance with the specification for the steel.
    § Optional. See ASTM A6, ‘‘General Requirements for Rolled Steel Plates, Shapes, Sheet Piling, and Bars for
Structural Use.’’
    ‫ ن‬90⬚ bend for No. 11 bars.
4.56                                SECTION FOUR


   Above 2.0% carbon content is the region of the cast irons. Above the A1,3 tem-
perature, austenite, the eutectic ledeburite and cementite occur; below the A1,3 tem-
perature, the austenite transforms to pearlite, and a similar transformation of the
ledeburite occurs.
   When the silicon content is kept low, and the metal is cooled rapidly, white cast
iron results. It is hard and brittle because of the high cementite content. White cast
iron as such has little use; but when it is reheated and held a long time in the
vicinity of the transformation temperature, then cooled slowly, the cementite de-
composes to ferrite and nodular or temper carbon. The result is black-heart mal-
leable iron. If the carbon is removed during malleabilization, white-heart malleable
iron results.
   If the silicon content is raised, and the metal is cooled relatively slowly, gray
cast iron results. It contains cementite, pearlite, ferrite, and some free carbon, which
gives it its gray color. Gray iron is considerably softer and tougher than white cast
iron and is generally used for castings of all kinds. Often, it is alloyed with elements
like nickel, chromium, copper, and molybdenum.
   At 5.0% carbon, the end products is hard, brittle iron carbide or cementite.


4.40.3   Types of Carbon Steels

Most of the steel used for construction is low- to medium-carbon, relatively mild,
tough, and strong, fairly easy to work by cutting, punching, riveting, and welding.
Table 4.16 summarizes the most important carbon steels and low-alloy steels used
in construction as specified by ASTM.
   The plain iron-carbon metals with less than 0.8% carbon content consist of
ferrite and pearlite and provide the low-carbon (0.06 to 0.30%), medium-carbon
(0.30 to 0.50%), and high-carbon (0.50 to 0.80%) steels called hypoeutectoid steels.
The higher-carbon or hypereutectoid tool steels contain 0.8 to 2.0% carbon and
consist of pearlite and cementite. The eutectoid steels occurring in the vicinity of
0.8% carbon are essentially all pearlite.
   The American Iron and Steel Institute and the Society of Automotive Engineers
have designated standard compositions for various steels including plain carbon
steels and alloy steels. AISI and SAE numbers and compositions for several rep-
resentative hot-rolled carbon-steel bars are given in Table 4.17.
   Prestressed concrete imposes special requirements for reinforcing steel. It must
be of high strength with a high yield point and minimum creep in the working
range. Table 4.16 and 4.18 give ASTM specification requirements for bars, wires,
and strands.


4.40.4   Types of Structural Steels

Structural steels are low- to medium-carbon steels used in elements 1⁄4 in thick or
more to form structural framing. The American Institute of Steel Construction
(AISC) ‘‘Code of Standard Practice for Steel Buildings and Bridges’’ lists the el-
ements that are included in the scope of the work in contract documents for struc-
tural steel. The list includes flexural members, columns, trusses, bearings and bear-
ing plates, bracing, hangers, bolts and nuts, shear connectors, wedges, and shims.
The AISC ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel Buildings’’ (ASD and LRFD) tabulates
the types of structural steel that are approved for use in buildings. These steels are
given in Table 4.16.
                                    BUILDING MATERIALS                                     4.57


       TABLE 4.17 Standard Steels for Hot-Rolled Bars (Basic open-hearth and
       acid bessemer carbon steels)

                                      Chemical composition limits, %
       SAE and
       AISI No.           Carbon      Manganese         Max phosphorus      Max sulfur
          1008       0.10 max         0.30 / 0.50             0.040            0.050
          1010       0.08 / 0.13      0.30 / 0.60             0.040            0.050
          1015       0.13 / 0.18      0.30 / 0.60             0.040            0.050
          1020       0.18 / 0.23      0.30 / 0.60             0.040            0.050
          1025       0.22 / 0.28      0.30 / 0.60             0.040            0.050
          1030       0.28 / 0.34      0.60 / 0.90             0.040            0.050
          1040       0.37 / 0.44      0.60 / 0.90             0.040            0.050
          1050       0.48 / 0.55      0.60 / 0.90             0.040            0.050
          1070       0.65 / 0.75      0.60 / 0.90             0.040            0.050
          1084       0.80 / 0.93      0.60 / 0.90             0.040            0.050
          1095       0.90 / 1.03      0.30 / 0.50             0.040            0.050



TABLE 4.18 ASTM Requirements for Prestressing Bars and Wires

                                 ASTM                  Tensile             Minimum yield
       Material                designation          strength, ksi             strength
Seven-wire steel strand            A416
  Grade 250                                             250           85% of breaking strength,
  Grade 270                                             170             at 1% extension
Uncoated steel wire                A421
  Type BA                                            235–240          85% of breaking strength,
  Type WA                                            235–250            at 1% extension
High-strength bar                  A722
  Type I                                                150           85% of tensile strength
  Type II                                               150           80% of tensile strength



   In accordance with present practice, the steels described in this section and in
Sec. 7 are given the names of the corresponding ASTM specifications for the steels.
For example, all steels conforming with ASTM A588, ‘‘Specification for High-
Strength Low-Alloy Structural Steel,’’ are called A588 steel. Further identification
may be given by a grade, which usually indicates the steel yield strength.
   Structural steels may be classified as carbon steels; high-strength, low-alloy
steels; heat-treated, high-strength carbon steels; or heat-treated, constructional alloy
steels.
   Carbon steels satisfy all of the following requirements:
1. The maximum content specified for alloying elements does not exceed the fol-
   lowing: manganese, 1.65%; silicon, 0.60%; copper, 0.60%.
2. The specified minimum for copper does not exceed 0.40%.
3. No minimum content is specified for other elements added to obtain a desired
   alloying effect.
A36 and A529 steels are included in this category.
4.58                                 SECTION FOUR


    High-strength, low-alloy steels have specified minimum yield strengths larger
than 40 ksi, which are attained without heat treatment. A242, A572, and A588
steels are included in this category. A242 and A572 steel are often referred to as
weathering steels, because they have higher resistance to corrosion than carbon
steels. On exposure to ordinary atmospheric conditions, they develop a protective
oxide surface.
    Heat-treated, high-strength carbon steels are heat-treated to achieve specified
high strength and toughness. A633, A678, and A852 steels are included in this
category.
    Heat-treated, constructional alloy steels contain alloying elements in excess
of the limits for carbon steels and are heat-treated to obtain a combination of high
strength and toughness. These are the strongest steels in general structural use. The
various grades of A514 steel, with yield strengths up to 100 ksi, are in this category.



4.41     PROPERTIES OF STRUCTURAL STEELS

Figure 4.3 shows a typical stress-strain curve for each classification of structural
steels defined in Art. 4.40.4. The diagram illustrates the higher-strength levels
achieved with heat treatment and addition of alloys.


4.41.1   Tensile Properties of Structural Steels

The curves in Fig. 4.3 were derived from tensile tests. The yield points, strengths,
and modulus of elasticity obtained from compression tests would be about the same.
   The initial portion of the curves in Fig. 4.3 is shown to a magnified scale in
Fig. 4.4. It indicates that there is an initial elastic range for the structural steels in
which there is no permanent deformation on removal of the load. The modulus of




                      FIGURE 4.3 Typical stress-strain curves for
                      structural steels.
                                                           BUILDING MATERIALS                                       4.59


                                 120
                                           0.005
                                                                     A514 STEEL

                                 100
                                                              0.2% OFFSET YIELD STRENGTH
                                                            0.5% E.U.L. YIELD STRENGTH


                                  80                                          HEAT-TREATED, HIGH-STRENGTH
                   STRESS, KSI                                                CARBON STEEL


                                                                       HIGH-STRENGTH, LOW-ALLOY STEEL
                                  60


                                                                         A36 STEEL
                                                   UPPER YIELD LIMIT
                                  40
                                                                                             SLOPE = E st
                                                   LOWER YIELD LIMIT
                                                                        ⑀st

                                                    PLASTIC RANGE              STRAIN-HARDENING RANGE
                                  20
                                                            INELASTIC RANGE
                                               ELASTIC RANGE
                                                  SLOPE = E
                                   0
                                       0           0.005     0.010       0.015       0.020     0.025        0.030
                                               0.002                 STRAIN, IN. PER IN.

                   FIGURE 4.4 Magnification of the initial portions of
                   the stress-strain curves for structural steels.



elasticity E, which is given by the slope of the curves, is nearly a constant 29,000
ksi for all the steels. For carbon and high-strength, low-alloy steels, the inelastic
range, where strains exceed those in the elastic range, consists of two parts: Initially,
a plastic range occurs in which the steels yield; that is, strain increases with no
increase in stress. Then follows a strain-hardening range in which increase in strain
is accompanied by a significant increase in stress.
    The curves in Fig. 4.4 also show an upper and lower yield point for the carbon
and high-strength, low-alloy steels. The upper yield point is the one specified in
standard specifications for the steels. In contrast, the curves do not indicate a yield
point for the heat-treated steels. For these steels, ASTM 370, ‘‘Mechanical Testing
of Steel Products,’’ recognizes two ways of indicating the stress at which there is
a significant deviation from the proportionality of stress to strain. One way, appli-
cable to steels with a specified yield point of 80 ksi or less, is to define the yield
point as the stress at which a test specimen reaches a 0.5% extension under load
(0.5% EUL). The second way is to define the yield strength as the stress at which
a test specimen reaches a strain (offset) 0.2% greater than that for elastic behavior.
Yield point and yield strength are often referred to as yield stress.
    Ductility is measured in tension tests by percent elongation over a given gage
length—usually 2 or 8 in—or percent reduction of cross-sectional area. Ductility
is an important property because it permits redistribution of stresses in continuous
members and at points of high local stresses.
    Poisson’s ratio, the ratio of transverse to axial strain, also is measured in tension
tests. It may be taken as 0.30 in the elastic range and 0.50 in the plastic range for
structural steels.
    Cold working of structural steels, that is, forming plates or structural shapes
into other shapes at room temperature, changes several properties of the steels. The
resulting strains are in the strain-hardening range. Yield strength increases but duc-
tility decreases. (Some steels are cold rolled to obtain higher strengths.) If a steel
4.60                                 SECTION FOUR


element is strained into the strain-hardening range, then unloaded and allowed to
age at room or moderately elevated temperatures (a process called strain aging),
yield and tensile strengths are increased, whereas ductility is decreased. Heat treat-
ment can be used to modify the effects of cold working and strain aging.
    Residual stresses remain in structural elements after they are rolled or fabri-
cated. They also result from uneven cooling after rolling. In a welded member,
tensile residual stresses develop near the weld and compressive stresses elsewhere.
Plates with rolled edges have compressive residual stresses at the edges, whereas
flame-cut edges have tensile residual stresses. When loads are applied to such mem-
bers, some yielding may take place where the residual stresses occur. Because of
the ductility of steel, however, the effect on tensile strength is not significant but
the buckling strength of columns may be lowered.
    Strain rate also changes the tensile properties of structural steels. In the ordinary
tensile test, load is applied slowly. The resulting data are appropriate for design of
structures for static loads. For design for rapid application of loads, such as impact
loads, data from rapid tension tests are needed. Such tests indicate that yield and
tensile strengths increase but ductility and the ratio of tensile strength to yield
strength decrease.
    High temperatures too affect properties of structural steels. As temperatures
increase, the stress-strain curve typically becomes more rounded and tensile and
yield strengths, under the action of strain aging, decrease. Poisson’s ratio is not
significantly affected but the modulus of elasticity decreases. Ductility is lowered
until a minimum value is reached. Then, it rises with increase in temperature and
becomes larger than the ductility at room temperature.
    Low temperatures in combination with tensile stress and especially with geo-
metric discontinuities, such as notches, bolt holes, and welds, may cause a brittle
failure. This is a failure that occurs by cleavage, with little indication of plastic
deformation. A ductile failure, in contrast, occurs mainly by shear, usually preceded
by large plastic deformation. One of the most commonly used tests for rating steels
on their resistance to brittle fracture is the Charpy V-notch test. It evaluates notch
toughness at specific temperatures.
    Toughness is defined as the capacity of a steel to absorb energy; the greater the
capacity, the greater the toughness. Determined by the area under the stress-strain
curve, toughness depends on both strength and ductility of the metal. Notch tough-
ness is the toughness in the region of notches or other stress concentrations. A
quantitative measure of notch toughness is fracture toughness, which is determined
by fracture mechanics from relationships between stress and flaw size.

4.41.2   Shear Properties of Structural Steels
The shear modulus of elasticity G is the ratio of shear stress to shear strain during
initial elastic behavior. It can be computed from Eq. (5.25) from values of modulus
of elasticity and Poisson’s ratio developed in tension stress-strain tests. Thus G for
structural steels is generally taken as 11,000 ksi.
    The shear strength, or shear stress at failure in pure shear, ranges from 0.67Ft
to 0.75Ft for structural steels, where Ft is the tensile strength. The yield strength
in shear is about 0.57Ft.

4.41.3   Creep and Relaxation
Creep, a gradual change in strain under constant stress, is usually not significant
for structural steel framing in buildings, except in fires. Creep usually occurs under
high temperatures or relatively high stresses, or both.
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.61


    Relaxation, a gradual decrease in load or stress under a constant strain, is a
significant concern in the application of steel tendons to prestressing (Art. 9.104).
With steel wire or strand, relaxation can occur at room temperature. To reduce
relaxation substantially, stabilized, or low-relaxation, strand may be used. This is
produced by pretensioning strain at a temperature of about 600⬚F. A permanent
elongation of about 1% remains and yield strength increases to about 5% over
stress-relieved (heat-treated but not tensioned) strain.


4.41.4   Hardness of Structural Steels

Hardness is used in production of steels to estimate tensile strength and to check
the uniformity of tensile strength in various products. Hardness is determined as a
number related to resistance to indentation. Any of several tests may be used, the
resulting hardness numbers being dependent on the type of penetrator and load.
These should be indicated when a hardness number is given. Commonly used hard-
ness tests are the Brinell, Rockwell, Knoop, and Vickers. ASTM A370, ‘‘Mechan-
ical Testing of Steel Products,’’ contains tables that relate hardness numbers from
the different tests to each other and to the corresponding approximate tensile
strength.


4.41.5   Fatigue of Structural Steels

Under cyclic loading, especially when stress reversal occurs, a structural member
may eventually fail because cracks form and propagate. Known as a fatigue failure,
this can take place at stress levels well below the yield stress. Fatigue resistance
may be determined by a rotating-beam test, flexure test, or axial-load test. In these
tests, specimens are subjected to stresses that vary, usually in a constant stress range
between maximum and minimum stresses until failure occurs. Results of the tests
are plotted on an S-N diagram, where S is the maximum stress (fatigue strength)
and N is the number of cycles to failure (fatigue life). Such diagrams indicate that
the failure strength of a structural steel decreases with increase in the number of
cycles until a minimum value is reached, the fatigue limit. Presumably, if the
maximum stress does not exceed the fatigue limit, an unlimited number of cycles
of that ratio of maximum to minimum stress can be applied without failure. With
tension considered positive and compression, negative, tests also show that as the
ratio of maximum to minimum stress is increased, fatigue strength is lowered sig-
nificantly.
    Since the tests are made on polished specimens and steel received from mills
has a rough surface, fatigue data for design should be obtained from tests made on
as-received material.
    Tests further indicate that steels with about the same tensile strength have about
the same fatigue strength. Hence the S-N diagram obtained for one steel may be
used for other steels with about the same tensile strength.


4.42     HEAT TREATMENT AND HARDENING OF
         STEELS

Heat-treated and hardened steels are sometimes required in building operations. The
most familiar heat treatment is annealing, a reheating operation in which the metal
4.62                               SECTION FOUR


is usually heated to the austenitic range (Fig. 4.2) and cooled slowly to obtain the
softest, most ductile state. Cold working is often preceded by annealing. Annealing
may be only partial, just sufficient to relieve internal stresses that might cause
deformation or cracking, but not enough to reduce markedly the increased strength
and yield point brought about by the cold working, for example.
   Another type of heat treatment that may be used is normalizing. It requires
heating steel to 100 to 150⬚F above the A3 temperature line in Fig. 4.2. Then, the
steel is allowed to cool in still air. (The rate of cooling is much more rapid than
that used in annealing.) Normalizing may be used to refine steel grain size, which
depends on the finishing temperature during hot rolling, or to obtain greater notch
toughness.
   Thick plates have a coarser grain structure than thin plates and thus can benefit
more from normalizing. This grain structure results from the fewer rolling passes
required for production of thick plates, consequent higher finishing temperature,
and slower cooling.
   Sometimes, a hard surface is required on a soft, tough core. Two principal case-
hardening methods are employed. For case carburizing, a low- to medium-carbon
steel is packed in carbonaceous materials and heated to the austenite range. Carbon
diffuses into the surface, providing a hard, high-carbon case when the part is cooled.
For nitriding, the part is exposed to ammonia gas or a cyanide at moderately
elevated temperatures. Extremely hard nitrides are formed in the case and provide
a hard surface.


4.43   EFFECTS OF GRAIN SIZE

When a low-carbon steel is heated above the A3 temperature line (Fig. 4.2), for
example, to hot rolling and forging temperatures, the steel may grow coarse grains.
For some applications, this structure may be desirable; for example, it permits
relatively deep hardening, and if the steel is to be used in elevated-temperature
service, it will have higher load-carrying capacity and higher creep strength than if
the steel had fine grains.
    Fine grains, however, enhance many steel properties: notch toughness, benda-
bility, and ductility. In quenched and tempered steels, higher yield strengths are
obtained. Furthermore, fine-grain, heat-treated steels have less distortion, less
quench cracking, and smaller internal stresses.
    During the production of a steel, grain growth may be inhibited by an appropriate
dispersion of nonmetallic inclusions or by carbides that dissolve slowly or remain
undissolved during cooling. The usual method of making fine-grain steel employs
aluminum deoxidation. In such steels, the inhibiting agent may be a submicroscopic
dispersion of aluminum nitride or aluminum oxide. Fine grains also may be pro-
duced by hot working rolled or forged products, which otherwise would have a
coarse-grain structure. The temperature at the final stage of hot working determines
the final grain size. If the finishing temperature is relatively high and the grains
after air-cooling are coarse, the size may be reduced by normalizing (Art. 4.42).
Fine- or coarse-grain steels may be heat treated to be coarse- or fine-grain.


4.44   STEEL ALLOYS

Plain carbon steels can be given a great range of properties by heat treatment and
by working; but addition of alloying elements greatly extends those properties or
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.63


makes the heat-treating operations easier and simpler. For example, combined high
tensile strength and toughness, corrosion resistance, high-speed cutting, and many
other specialized purposes require alloy steels. However, the most important effect
of alloying is the influence on hardenability.


4.44.1   Effects of Alloying Elements

Important alloying elements from the standpoint of building, and their principal
effects, are summarized below:
    Aluminum restricts grain growth during heat treatment and promotes surface
hardening by nitriding.
    Chromium is a hardener, promotes corrosion resistance (see Art. 4.44.2), and
promotes wear resistance.
    Copper promotes resistance to atmospheric corrosion and is sometimes com-
bined with molybdenum for this purpose in low-carbon steels and irons. It strength-
ens steel and increases the yield point without unduly changing elongation or re-
duction of area.
    Manganese in low concentrations promotes hardenability and nondeforming,
nonshrinking characteristics for tool steels. In high concentrations, the steel is aus-
tenitic under ordinary conditions, is extremely tough, and work-hardens readily. It
is therefore used for teeth of power-shovel dippers, railroad frogs, rock crushers,
and similar applications.
    Molybdenum is usually associated with other elements, especially chromium
and nickel. It increases corrosion resistance, raises tensile strength and elastic limit
without reducing ductility, promotes casehardening, and improves impact resistance.
    Nickel boosts tensile strength and yield point without reducing ductility; in-
creases low-temperature toughness, whereas ordinary carbon steels become brittle;
promotes casehardening; and in high concentrations improves corrosion resistance
under severe conditions. It is often used with chromium (see Art. 4.44.2). Invar
contains 36% nickel.
    Silicon strengthens low-alloy steels; improves oxidation resistance; with low
carbon yields transformer steel, because of low hysteresis loss and high permea-
bility; in high concentrations provides hard, brittle castings, resistant to corrosive
chemicals, useful in plumbing lines for chemical laboratories.
    Sulfur promotes free machining, especially in mild steels.
    Titanium prevents intergranular corrosion of stainless steels by preventing grain-
boundary depletion of chromium during such operations as welding and heat treat-
ment.
    Tungsten, vanadium, and cobalt are all used in high-speed tool steels, because
they promote hardness and abrasion resistance. Tungsten and cobalt also increase
high-temperature hardness.
    The principal effects of alloying elements are summarized in Table 4.19.


4.44.2   Stainless Steels

Stainless steels of primary interest in building are the wrought stainless steels of
the austenitic type. The austenitic stainless steels contain both chromium and nickel.
Total content of alloy metals is not less than 23%, with chromium not less than
16% and nickel not less than 7%. Commonly used stainless steels have a tensile
       TABLE 4.19 Effects of Alloying Elements in Steel*

                                                                                                     Influence exerted through
                                  Solid solubility                                                            carbide
                                                                                Influence on        Carbide-            Action
                            In gamma         In alpha         Influence on        austenite          forming            during
            Element            iron            iron               ferrite      (hardenability)      tendency          tempering       Principal functions
       Aluminum (Al)       1.1%                36%         Hardens             Increases         Negative                            1. Deoxides
                              (increased                     considerably by     hardenability     (graphitizes)                        efficiently
                              by C)                          solid solution      mildly, if                                          2. Restricts grain
                                                                                 dissolved in                                           growth (by forming
                                                                                 austenite                                              dispersed oxides or
                                                                                                                                        nitrides)
                                                                                                                                     3. Alloying element
                                                                                                                                        in nitriding steel
       Chromium (Cr)       12.8% (20%        Unlimited     Hardens slightly;   Increases         Greater than       Mildly resists   1. Increases resistance
                             with                            increases           hardenability     Mn; less than     softening          to corrosion and
                             0.5% C)                         corrosion           moderately        W                                    oxidation
4.64




                                                             resistance                                                              2. Increases
                                                                                                                                        hardenability
                                                                                                                                     3. Adds some
                                                                                                                                        strength at high
                                                                                                                                        temperatures
                                                                                                                                     4. Resists abrasion
                                                                                                                                        and wear (with
                                                                                                                                        high carbon)
       Cobalt (Co)         Unlimited           75%         Hardens             Decreases         Similar to Fe      Sustains         1. Contribute to red
                                                             considerably by     hardenability                        hardness          hardness by
                                                             solid solution      as dissolved                         by solid          hardening ferrite
                                                                                                                      solution
TABLE 4.19 Effects of Alloying Elements in Steel* (Continued )

                                                                                               Influence exerted through
                           Solid solubility                                                             carbide
                                                                          Influence on        Carbide-            Action
                      In gamma        In alpha          Influence on        austenite          forming            during
     Element             iron           iron                ferrite      (hardenability)      tendency          tempering         Principal functions
Manganese (Mn)      Unlimited             3%         Hardens markedly;   Increases         Greater than Fe;   Very little, in   1. Counteracts
                                                       reduces             hardenability     less than Cr       usual              brittleness from the
                                                       plasticity          moderately                           percentages        sulfur
                                                       somewhat                                                                 2. Increases
                                                                                                                                   hardenability
                                                                                                                                   inexpensively
Molybdenum (Mo)     3% Ⳳ (8%       37.5% (less       Provides age-       Increases         Strong; greater    Opposes           1. Raises grain-
                      with           with              hardening           hardenability     than Cr            softening          coarsening
                      0.3% C)        lowered           system in high      strongly                             by                 temperature of
                                     temp)             Mo-Fe alloys        (Mo ⬎ Cr)                            secondary          austenite
                                                                                                                hardening       2. Deepens hardening
                                                                                                                                3. Counteracts
                                                                                                                                   tendency toward
                                                                                                                                   temper brittleness
                                                                                                                                4. Raises hot and
                                                                                                                                   creep strength, red
                                                                                                                                   hardness
                                                                                                                                5. Enhances corrosion
                                                                                                                                   resistance in
                                                                                                                                   stainless steel
                                                                                                                                6. Forms abrasion-
                                                                                                                                   resisting particles
Nickel (Ni)         Unlimited      10%               Strengthens and     Increases         Negative           Very little in    1. Strengthens
                                     (irrespective     toughens by         hardenability     (graphitizes)      small              unquenched or
                                     of carbon         solid solution      mildly, but                          percentages        annealed steels
                                     content)                              tends to                                             2. Toughness
                                                                           retain                                                  pearlitic-ferric
                                                                           austenite                                               steels (especially at
                                                                           with higher                                             low temperatures)
                                                                           carbon                                               3. Renders high-
                                                                                                                                   chromium iron
                                                                                                                                   alloys austenitic
       TABLE 4.19 Effects of Alloying Elements in Steel* (Continued )

                                                                                                         Influence exerted through
                                  Solid solubility                                                                carbide
                                                                                  Influence on           Carbide-           Action
                            In gamma         In alpha           Influence on        austenite             forming           during
            Element            iron            iron                 ferrite      (hardenability)         tendency         tempering    Principal functions
       Phosphorus (P)          0.5%       2.8%               Hardens strongly    Increases         Nil                                1. Strengthens low-
                                             (irrespective     by solid            hardenability                                         carbon steel
                                             of carbon         solution                                                               2. Increases resistance
                                             content)                                                                                    to corrosion
                                                                                                                                      3. Improves
                                                                                                                                         machinability in
                                                                                                                                         free-cutting steels
       Silicon (Si)        2% Ⳳ (9%       18.5% (not         Hardens with loss   Increases         Negative             Sustains      1. Used as general-
                             with           much               in plasticity       hardenability     (graphitizes)        hardness       purpose deoxidizer
                             0.35% C)       changed by         (Mn ⬍ Si ⬍ P)       moderately                             by solid    2. Alloying element
                                            carbon)                                                                       solution       for electrical and
4.66




                                                                                                                                         magnetic sheet
                                                                                                                                      3. Improves oxidation
                                                                                                                                         resistance
                                                                                                                                      4. Increases
                                                                                                                                         hardenability of
                                                                                                                                         steel carrying
                                                                                                                                         nongraphitizing
                                                                                                                                         elements
                                                                                                                                      5. Strengthens low-
                                                                                                                                         alloy steels
       Titanium (Ti)          0.75% (1%         6% Ⳳ (less      Provides age-      Probably          Greatest known    Persistent      1. Fixes carbon in
                                 Ⳳ with           with            hardening          increases         (2% Ti            carbides         inert particles
                                 0.20% C)         lowered         system in high     hardenability     renders           probably         a. Reduces
                                                  temp)           Ti-Fe alloys       very              0.50% carbon      unaffected.      martensitic
                                                                                     strongly as       steel             Some             hardness and
                                                                                     dissolved.        unhardenable)     secondary        hardenability in
                                                                                     The carbide                         hardening        medium-chromium
                                                                                     effects                                              steels
                                                                                     reduce                                               b. Prevents
                                                                                     hardenability                                        formation of
                                                                                                                                          austenite in high-
                                                                                                                                          chromium steels
                                                                                                                                          c. Prevents
                                                                                                                                          localized depletion
                                                                                                                                          of chromium in
                                                                                                                                          stainless steel
                                                                                                                                          during long
                                                                                                                                          heating.
       Tungsten (W)           6% (11%           33% (less       Provides age-      Increases         Strong            Opposes         1. Forms hard,
4.67




                                with              with            hardening          hardenability                       softening        abrasion-resistant
                                0.25% C)          lowered         system in high     strongly in                         by               particles in tool
                                                  temp)           W-Fe alloys        small                               secondary        steels
                                                                                     amounts                             hardening     2. Promotes hardness
                                                                                                                                          and strength at
                                                                                                                                          elevated
                                                                                                                                          temperature
       Vanadium (V)           1% (4%            Unlimited       Hardens            Increases         Very strong (V    Max for         1. Elevates
                                with                              moderately by      hardenability     ⬍ Ti or Cb)      secondary         coarsening
                                0.20% C)                          solid solution     very                               hardening         temperature of
                                                                                     strongly, as                                         austenite (promotes
                                                                                     dissolved                                            fine grain)
                                                                                                                                       2. Increases
                                                                                                                                          hardenability (when
                                                                                                                                          dissolved)
                                                                                                                                       3. Resists tempering
                                                                                                                                          and causes marked
                                                                                                                                          secondary
                                                                                                                                          hardening
          * ‘‘Metals Handbook,’’ American Society for Metals.
4.68                                SECTION FOUR


strength of 75 ksi and yield point of 30 ksi when annealed. Cold-finished steels
may have a tensile strength as high as 125 ksi with a yield point of 100 ksi.
    Austenitic stainless steels are tough, strong, and shock-resistant, but work-harden
readily; so some difficulty on this score may be experienced with cold working and
machining. These steels can be welded readily but may have to be stabilized (e.g.,
AISI Types 321 and 347) against carbide precipitation and intergranular corrosion
due to welding unless special precautions are taken. These steels have the best
high-temperature strength and resistance to scaling of all the stainless steels.
    Types 303 and 304 are the familiar 18-8 stainless steels widely used for building
applications. These and Types 302 and 316 are the most commonly employed
stainless steels. Where maximum resistance to corrosion is required, such as resis-
tance to pitting by seawater and chemicals, the molybdenum-containing Types 316
and 317 are best.
    For resistance to ordinary atmospheric corrosion, some of the martensitic and
ferritic stainless steels, containing 15 to 20% chromium and no nickel, are em-
ployed. The martensitic steels, in general, range from about 12 to 18% chromium
and from 0.08 to 1.10% carbon. Their response to heat treatment is similar to that
of the plain carbon steels. When chromium content ranges from 15 to 30% and
carbon content is below 0.35%, the steels are ferritic and nonhardenable. The high-
chromium steels are resistant to oxidizing corrosion and are useful in chemical
plants.



4.45   WELDING FERROUS METALS

General welding characteristics of the various types of ferrous metals are as follows:
   Wrought iron is ideally forged but may be welded by other methods if the base
metal is thoroughly fused. Slag melts first and may confuse unwary operators.
   Low-carbon iron and steels (0.30%C or less) are readily welded and require
no preheating or subsequent annealing unless residual stresses are to be removed.
   Medium-carbon steels (0.30 to 0.50%C) can be welded by the various fusion
processes. In some cases, especially in steel with more than 0.40% carbon, pre-
heating and subsequent heat treatment may be necessary.
   High-carbon steels (0.50 to 0.90%C) are more difficult to weld and, especially
in arc welding, may have to be preheated to at least 500⬚F and subsequently heated
between 1200 and 1450⬚F. For gas welding, a carburizing flame is often used. Care
must be taken not to destroy the heat treatment to which high-carbon steels may
have been subjected.
   Tool steels (0.80 to 1.50%C) are difficult to weld. Preheating, postannealing,
heat treatment, special welding rods, and great care are necessary for successful
welding.
   Welding of structural steels is governed by the American Welding Society
‘‘Structural Welding Code,’’ AWS D1.1, the American Institute of Steel Construc-
tion Specification for the Design, Fabrication and Erection of Structural Steel for
Buildings, or a local building code. AWS D1.1 specifies tests to be used in quali-
fying welders and types of welds. The AISC Specification and many building codes
require, in general, that only qualified welds be used and that they be made only
by qualified welders.
   Structural steels may be welded by shielded metal arc, submerged arc, gas metal
arc, flux-cored arc, electroslag, electrogas, or stud-welding processes.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                               4.69


    Shielded-metal-arc welding fuses parts to be joined by the heat of an electric
arc struck between a coated metal electrode and the material being joined, or base
metal. The electrode supplies filler material for making the weld, gas for shielding
the molten metal from the air, and flux for refining this metal.
    Submerged-arc welding fuses the parts to be joined by the heat of an electric
arc struck between a bare metal electrode and base metal. The weld is shielded
from the air by flux. The electrode or a supplementary welding rod supplies metal
filler for making the weld.
    Gas-metal-arc welding produces fusion by the heat of an electric arc struck
between a filler-metal electrode and base metal, while the molten metal is shielded
by a gas or mixture of gas and flux. For structural steels, the gas may be argon,
argon with oxygen, or carbon dioxide.
    Electroslag welding uses a molten slag to melt filler metal and surfaces of the
base metal and thus make a weld. The slag, electrically conductive, is maintained
molten by its resistance to an electric current that flows between an electrode and
the base metal. The process is suitable only for welding in the vertical position.
Moving, water-cooled shoes are used to contain and shape the weld surface. The
slag shields the molten metal.
    Electrogas welding is similar to the electroslag process. The electrogas process,
however, maintains an electric arc continuously, uses an inert gas for shielding, and
the electrode provides flux.
    Stud welding is used to fuse metal studs or similar parts to other steel parts by
the heat of an electric arc. A welding gun is usually used to establish and control
the arc, and to apply pressure to the parts to be joined. At the end to be welded,
the stud is equipped with a ceramic ferrule, which contains flux and which also
partly shields the weld when molten.
    Preheating before welding reduces the risk of brittle failure. Initially, its main
effect is to lower the temperature gradient between the weld and adjoining base
metal. This makes cracking during cooling less likely and gives entrapped hydro-
gen, a possible source of embrittlement, a chance to escape. A later effect of pre-
heating is improved ductility and notch toughness of base and weld metals and
lower transition temperature of weld. When, however, welding processes that de-
posit weld metal low in hydrogen are used and suitable moisture control is main-
tained, the need for preheat can be eliminated. Such processes include use of low-
hydrogen electrodes and inert-arc and submerged-arc welding.
    Rapid cooling of a weld can have an adverse effect. One reason that arc strikes
that do not deposit weld metal are dangerous is that the heated metal cools very
fast. This causes severe embrittlement. Such arc strikes should be completely re-
moved. The material should be preheated, to prevent local hardening, and weld
metal should be deposited to fill the depression.
    Pronounced segregation in base metal may cause welds to crack under certain
fabricating conditions. These include use of high-heat-input electrodes, such as the
1
 ⁄4-in E6020, and deposition of large beads at slow speeds, as in automatic welding.
Cracking due to segregation, however, is rare with the degree of segregation nor-
mally occurring in hot-rolled carbon-steel plates.
    Welds sometimes are peened to prevent cracking or distortion, though there are
better ways of achieving these objectives. Specifications often prohibit peening of
the first and last weld passes. Peening of the first pass may crack or punch through
the weld. Peening of the last pass makes inspection for cracks difficult. But peening
is undesirable because it considerably reduces toughness and impact properties of
the weld metal. (The adverse effects, however, are eliminated by a covering weld
layer.) The effectiveness of peening in preventing cracking is open to question. And
4.70                               SECTION FOUR


for preventing distortion, special welding sequences and procedures are simpler and
easier.
   Failures in service rarely, if ever, occur in properly made welds of adequate
design. If a fracture occurs, it is initiated at a notchlike defect. Notches occur for
various reasons. The toe of a weld may from a natural notch. The weld may contain
flaws that act as notches. A welding-arc strike in the base metal may have an
embrittling effect, especially if weld metal is not deposited. A crack started at such
notches will propagate along a path determined by local stresses and notch tough-
ness of adjacent material.
   Weldability of structural steels is influenced by their chemical content. Carbon,
manganese, silicon, nickel, chromium, and copper, for example, tend to have an
adverse effect, whereas molybdenum and vanadium may be beneficial. To relate
the influence of chemical content on structural steel properties to weldability, the
use of a carbon equivalent has been proposed. One formula suggested is
                                            Mn Si
                                Ceq ⫽ C ⫹     ⫹                                  (4.3)
                                            4   4
where C ⫽ carbon content, %
    Mn ⫽ manganese content, %
      Si ⫽ silicon content, %
Another proposed formula includes more elements:
                               Mn Ni Cr Mo      V    Cu
                   Ceq ⫽ C ⫹     ⫹   ⫹   ⫺    ⫺    ⫹                             (4.4)
                               6   20 10   50   10   40
where Ni   ⫽   nickel content, %
      Cr   ⫽   chromium content, %
     Mo    ⫽   molybdenum content, %
       V   ⫽   vanadium content, %
     Cu    ⫽   copper content, %
   Carbon equivalent appears to be related to the maximum rate at which a weld
and adjacent base metal may be cooled after welding without underbead cracking
occurring. The higher the carbon equivalent, the lower will be the allowable cooling
rate. Also, the higher the carbon equivalent, the more important use of low-
hydrogen electrodes and preheating becomes.



4.46   EFFECTS OF STEEL PRODUCTION
       METHODS

The processing of steels after conversion of pig iron to steel in a furnace has an
important influence on the characteristics of the final products. The general pro-
cedure is as follows: The molten steel at about 2900⬚F is fed into a steel ladle, a
refractory-lined open-top vessel. Alloying materials and deoxidizers may be added
during the tapping of the heat or to the ladle. From the ladle, the liquid steel is
poured into molds, where it solidifies. These castings, called ingots, then are placed
in special furnaces, called soaking pits. There, the ingots are held at the desired
temperature for rolling until the temperature is uniform throughout each casting.
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                 4.71


    Ideally, an ingot should be homogeneous, with a fine, equiaxial crystal structure.
It should not contain nonmetallic inclusions or cavities and should be free of chem-
ical segregation. In practice, however, because of uneven cooling and release of
gases in the mold, an ingot may develop any of a number of internal and external
defects. Some of these may be eliminated or minimized during the rolling operation.
Prevention or elimination of the others often adds to the cost of steels.
    Steel cools unevenly in a mold, because the liquid at the mold walls solidifies
first and cools more rapidly than metal in the interior of the ingot. Gases, chiefly
oxygen, dissolved in the liquid, are released as the liquid cools. Four types of ingot
may result—killed, semikilled, capped, and rimmed—depending on the amount of
gases dissolved in the liquid, the carbon content of the steel, and the amount of
deoxidizers added to the steel.
    A fully killed ingot develops no gas; the molten steel lies dead in the mold. The
top surface solidifies relatively fast. Pipe, an intermittently bridged shrinkage cavity,
forms below the top. Fully killed steels usually are poured in big-end-up molds
with ‘‘hot tops’’ to confine the pipe to the hot top, which is later discarded. A
semikilled ingot develops a slight amount of gas. The gas, trapped when the metal
solidifies, forms blowholes in the upper portion of the ingot. A capped ingot de-
velops rimming action, a boiling caused by evolution of gas, forcing the steel to
rise. The action is stopped by a metal cap secured to the mold. Strong upward
currents along the sides of the mold sweep away bubbles that otherwise would form
blowholes in the upper portion of the ingot. Blowholes do form, however, in the
lower portion, separated by a thick solid skin from the mold walls. A rimmed ingot
develops a violent rimming action, confining blowholes to only the bottom quarter
of the ingot.
    Rimmed or capped steels cannot be produced if too much carbon is present
(0.30% or more), because insufficient oxygen will be dissolved in the steels to
cause the rimming action. Killed and semikilled steels require additional costs for
deoxidizers if carbon content is low, and the deoxidation products form nonmetallic
inclusions in the ingot. Hence, it often is advantageous for steel producers to make
low-carbon steels by rimmed or capped practice, and high-carbon steels by killed
or semikilled practice.
    Pipe, or shrinkage cavities, generally is small enough in most steels to be elim-
inated by rolling. Blowholes in the interior of an ingot, small voids formed by
entrapped gases, also usually are eliminated during rolling. If they extend to the
surface, they may be oxidized and form seams when the ingot is rolled, because
the oxidized metal cannot be welded together. Properly made ingots have a thick
enough skin over blowholes to prevent oxidation.
    Segregation in ingots depends on the chemical composition and on turbulence
from gas evolution and convection currents in the molten metal. Killed steels have
less segregation than semikilled steels, and these types of steels have less segre-
gation than capped or rimmed steels. In rimmed steels, the effects of segregation
are so marked that interior and outer regions differ enough in chemical composition
to appear to be different steels. The boundary between these regions is sharp.
    Rimmed steels are made without additions of deoxidizers to the furnace and
with only small additions to the ladle, to ensure sufficient evolution of gas. When
properly made, rimmed ingots have little pipe and a good surface. Such steels are
preferred where surface finish is important and the effects of segregation will not
be harmful.
    Capped steels are made much like rimmed steels but with less rimming action.
Capped steels have less segregation. They are used to make sheet, strip, skelp,
tinplate, wire, and bars.
4.72                                 SECTION FOUR


    Semikilled steel is deoxidized less than killed steel. Most deoxidation is accom-
plished with additions of a deoxidizer to the ladle. Semikilled steels are used in
structural shapes and plates.
    Killed steels usually are deoxidized by additions to both furnace and ladle. Gen-
erally, silicon compounds are added to the furnace to lower the oxygen content of
the liquid metal and stop oxidation of carbon (block the heat). This also permits
addition of alloying elements that are susceptible to oxidation. Silicon or other
deoxidizers, such as aluminum, vanadium, and titanium, may be added to the ladle
to complete deoxidation. Aluminum, vanadium, and titanium have the additional
beneficial effect of inhibiting grain growth when the steel is normalized. (In the
hot-rolled conditions, such steels have about the same ferrite grain size as semikilled
steels.) Killed steels deoxidized with aluminum and silicon (made to fine-grain
practice) often are specified for construction applications because of better notch
toughness and lower transition temperatures than semikilled steels of the same com-
position.



4.47    EFFECTS OF HOT ROLLING

While plates and shapes for construction applications can be obtained from pro-
cesses other than casting and rolling of ingots, such as continuous casting, most
plates and shapes are made by hot-rolling ingots (Art. 4.46). But usually, the final
products are not rolled directly from ingots. First, the ingots are generally reduced
in cross section by rolling into billets, slabs, and blooms. These forms permit cor-
rection of defects before finish rolling, shearing into convenient lengths for final
rolling, reheating for further rolling, and transfer to other mills, if desired, for that
processing.
    Plates produced from slabs or directly from ingots, are distinguished from sheet,
strip, and flat bars by size limitations in ASTM A6. Generally, plates are heavier,
per linear foot, than these other products. Sheared plates, or sheared mill plates,
are made with straight horizontal rolls and later trimmed on all edges. Universal
plates, or universal mill plates, are formed between vertical and horizontal rolls and
are trimmed on the ends only.
    Some of the plates may be heat-treated, depending on grade of steel and intended
use. For carbon steel, the treatment may be annealing, normalizing, or stress re-
lieving. Plates of high-strength, low-alloy constructional steels may be quenched
and tempered. See Art. 4.42.
    Shapes are rolled from blooms that first are reheated to 2250⬚F. Rolls gradually
reduce the plastic blooms to the desired shapes and sizes. The shapes then are cut
to length for convenient handling with a hot saw.
    ASTM A6 requires that material for delivery ‘‘shall be free from injurious de-
fects and shall have a workmanlike finish.’’ The specification permits manufacturers
to condition plates and shapes ‘‘for the removal of injurious surface imperfections
or surface depressions by grinding, or chipping and grinding. . . .’’
    Internal structure and many properties of plates and shapes are determined
largely by the chemistry of the steel, rolling practice, cooling conditions after roll-
ing, and heat treatment, where used. The interior of ingots consists of large crystals,
called dendrites, characterized by a branching structure. Growth of individual den-
drites occurs principally along their longitudinal axes perpendicular to the ingot
surfaces. Heating for rolling tends to eliminate dendritic segregation, so that the
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.73


rolled products are more homogeneous than ingots. Furthermore, during rolling,
the dendritic structure is broken up. Also, recrystallization occurs. The final aus-
tenitic grain size is determined by the temperature of the steel during the last passes
through the rolls (Art. 4.43). In addition, dendrites and inclusions are reoriented in
the direction of rolling. As a result, ductility and bendability are much better in the
longitudinal direction than in the transverse, and these properties are poorest in the
thickness direction. The cooling rate after rolling determines the distribution of
ferrite and the grain size of the ferrite.
    In addition to the preceding effects, rolling also may induce residual stresses in
plates and shapes (Art. 4.41.1). Still other effects are a consequence of the final
thickness of the hot-rolled material.
    Thicker material requires less rolling, the finish rolling temperature is higher,
and the cooling rate is slower than for thin material. As a consequence, thin material
has a superior microstructure. Furthermore, thicker material can have a more un-
favorable state of stress because of stress raisers, such as tiny cracks and inclusions,
and residual stresses. Consequently, thin material develops higher tensile and yield
strengths than thick material of the same steel. ASTM specifications for structural
steels recognize this usually by setting lower yield points for thicker material. A36
steel, however, has the same yield point for all thicknesses. To achieve this, the
chemistry is varied for plates and shapes and for thin and thick plates. Thicker
plates contain more carbon and manganese to raise the yield point. This cannot be
done for high-strength steels because of the adverse effect on notch toughness,
ductility, and weldability.
    Thin material has greater ductility than thick material of the same steel. Since
normalizing refines the grain structure, thick material improves relatively more with
normalizing than does thin material. The improvement is even greater with silicon-
aluminum-killed steels.



4.48   EFFECTS OF PUNCHING AND SHEARING

Punching holes and shearing during fabrication are cold-working operations that
can cause brittle failure. Bolt holes, for example, may be formed by drilling, punch-
ing, or punching followed by reaming. Drilling is preferable to punching, because
punching drastically cold-works the material at the edge of a hole. This makes the
steel less ductile and raises the transition temperature. The degree of embrittlement
depends on type of steel and plate thickness. Furthermore, there is a possibility that
punching can produce short cracks extending radially from the hole. Consequently,
brittle failure can be initiated at the hole when the member is stressed.
    Should the material around the hole become heated, an additional risk of failure
is introduced. Heat, for example, may be supplied by an adjacent welding operation.
If the temperature should rise to the 400 to 850⬚F range, strain aging will occur in
material susceptible to it. The result will be a loss in ductility.
    Reaming a hole after punching can eliminate the short radial cracks and the risks
of embrittlement. For the purpose, the hole diameter should be increased by 1⁄16 to
1
 ⁄4 in by reaming, depending on material thickness and hole diameter.
    Shearing has about the same effects as punching. If sheared edges are to be left
exposed, 1⁄16 in or more material, depending on thickness, should be trimmed by
gas cutting. Note also that rough machining, for example, with edge planers making
a deep cut, can produce the same effects as shearing or punching.
4.74                                SECTION FOUR


4.49   CORROSION OF IRON AND STEEL

Corrosion of ferrous metals is caused by the tendency of iron (anode) to go into
solution in water as ferrous hydroxide and displace hydrogen, which in turn com-
bines with dissolved oxygen to form more water. At the same time, the dissolved
ferrous hydroxide is converted by more oxygen to the insoluble ferric hydroxide,
thereby allowing more iron to go into solution. Corrosion, therefore, requires liquid
water (as in damp air) and oxygen (which is normally present dissolved in the
water).
   Alloying elements can increase the resistance of steel considerably. For example,
addition of copper to structural steels A36 and A529 can about double their cor-
rosion resistance. Other steels, such as A242 and A588, are called weathering steels,
because they have three to four times the resistance of A36 steel (Art. 4.40.4).
   Protection against corrosion takes a variety of forms:

Deaeration. If oxygen is removed from water, corrosion stops. In hot-water heat-
ing systems, therefore, no fresh water should be added. Boiler feedwater is some-
times deaerated to retard corrosion.

Coatings
1. Paints. Most paints are based on oxidizing oil and a variety of pigments, of
   which oxides of iron, zinc sulfate, graphite, aluminum, and various hydrocarbons
   are a few. No one paint is best for all applications. Other paints are coatings of
   asphalt and tar. The AISC ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel Buildings’’ (ASD
   and LRFD) states that, in general, steelwork to be concealed within a building
   need not be painted and that steel to be encased in concrete should not be
   painted. Inspections of old buildings have revealed that concealed steelwork
   withstands corrosion virtually to the same degree whether or not it is painted.
2. Metallic. Zinc is applied by hot dipping (galvanizing) or powder (sherardiz-
   ing), hot tin drip, hot aluminum dip, and electrolytic plates of tin, copper, nickel,
   chromium, cadmium, and zinc. A mixture of lead and tin is called terneplate.
   Zinc is anodic to iron and protects, even after the coating is broken, by sacrificial
   protection. Tin and copper are cathodic and protect as long as the coating is
   unbroken but may hasten corrosion by pitting and other localized action once
   the coating is pierced.
3. Chemical. Insoluble phosphates, such as iron or zinc phosphate, are formed on
   the surface of the metal by treatment with phosphate solutions. These have some
   protective action and also form good bases for paints. Black oxide coatings are
   formed by treating the surface with various strong salt solutions. These coatings
   are good for indoor use but have limited life outdoors. They provide a good
   base for rust-inhibiting oils.

Cathodic Protection. As corrosion proceeds, electric currents are produced as the
metal at the anode goes into solution. If a sufficient countercurrent is produced, the
metal at the anode will not dissolve. This is accomplished in various ways, such
as connecting the iron to a more active metal like magnesium (rods suspended in
domestic water heaters) or connecting the part to be protected to buried scrap iron
and providing an external current source such as a battery or rectified current from
a power line (protection of buried pipe lines).
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                               4.75


4.50   STEEL AND STEEL ALLOY BIBLIOGRAPHY

American Iron and Steel Institute, 1000 16th St., N.W., Washington, DC 20036:
   ‘‘Carbon Steels, Chemical Composition Limits,’’ ‘‘Constructional Alloys, Chem-
ical Composition Limits’’; ‘‘Steel Products Manuals.’’
   American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, Pa.: ‘‘Standards.’’
   American Society for Metals, Cleveland, Ohio: ‘‘Metals Handbook.’’
   M. E. Shank, ‘‘Control of Steel Construction to Avoid Brittle Failure,’’ Welding
Research Council, New York.
   R. L. Brockenbrough and F. S. Merritt, ‘‘Structural Steel Designers Handbook,’’
2nd ed., McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York.


ALUMINUM AND ALUMINUM-BASED ALLOYS

Pure aluminum and aluminum alloys are used in buildings in various forms. High-
purity aluminum (at least 99% pure) is soft and ductile but weak. It has excellent
corrosion resistance and is used in buildings for such applications as bright foil for
heat insulation, roofing, flashing, gutters and downspouts, exterior and interior ar-
chitectural trim, and as pigment in aluminum-based paints. Its high heat conductiv-
ity recommends it for cooking utensils. The electrical conductivity of the electrical
grade is 61% of that of pure copper on an equal-volume basis and 201% on an
equal-weight basis.
    Aluminum alloys are generally harder and stronger than the pure metal. Fur-
thermore, pure aluminum is difficult to cast satisfactorily, whereas many of the
alloys are readily cast.
    Pure aluminum is generally more corrosion resistant than its alloys. Furthermore,
its various forms—pure and alloy—have different solution potentials; that is, they
are anodic or cathodic to each other, depending on their relative solution potentials.
A number of alloys are therefore made with centers or ‘‘cores’’ of aluminum alloys,
overlaid with layers of metal, either pure aluminum or alloys, which are anodic to
the core. If galvanic corrosion conditions are encountered, the cladding metal pro-
tects the core sacrifically.


4.51   ALUMINUM-ALLOY DESIGNATIONS

The alloys may be classified: (1) as cast and wrought, and (2) as heat-treatable and
non-heat-treatable. Wrought alloys can be worked mechanically by such processes
as rolling, extruding, drawing, or forging. Alloys are heat-treatable if the dissolved
constituents are less soluble in the solid state at ordinary temperatures than at
elevated temperatures, thereby making age-hardening possible. When heat-treated
to obtain complete solution, the product may be unstable and tend to age sponta-
neously. It may also be treated to produce stable tempers of varying degree. Cold
working or strain hardening is also possible, and combinations of tempering and
strain hardening can also be obtained.
    Because of these various possible combinations, a system of letter and number
designations has been worked out by the producers of aluminum and aluminum
4.76                                SECTION FOUR


alloys to indicate the compositions and the tempers of the various metals. Wrought
alloys are designated by a four-digit index system. 1xxx is for 99.00% aluminum
minimum. The last two digits indicate the minimum aluminum percentage. The
second digit represents impurity limits. (EC is a special designation for electrical
conductors.) 2xxx to 8xxx represent alloy groups in which the first number indicates
the principal alloying constituent, and the last two digits are identifying numbers
in the group. The second digit indicates modification of the basic alloy. The alloy
groups are listed in Table 4.20.
    For cast alloys, a similar designation system is used. The first two digits identify
the alloy or its purity. The last digit, preceded by a decimal point, indicates the
form of the material; for example, casting or ingot. Casting alloys may be sand or
permanent-mold alloys.
    Among the wrought alloys, the letter F, O, H, W, and T indicate various basic
temper designations. These letters in turn may be followed by numerals to indicate
various degrees of treatment. Temper designations are summarized in Table 4.21.
    The structural alloys general employed in building fall in the 2xxx, 5xxx, and
6xxx categories. Architectural alloys often used include 3xxx, 5xxx, and 6xxx
groups.


4.52   FINISHES FOR ALUMINUM

Almost all finishes used on aluminum may be divided into three major categories
in the system recommended by the The Aluminum Association: mechanical fin-
ishes, chemical finishes, and coatings. The last may be subdivided into anodic
coatings, resinous and other organic coatings, vitreous coatings, electroplated and
other metallic coatings, and laminated coatings.
   In The Aluminum Association system, mechanical and chemical finishes are
designated by M and C, respectively, and each of the five classes of coating is also
designated by a letter. The various finishes in each category are designated by two-
digit numbers after a letter. The principal finishes are summarized in Table 4.22.


4.53   STRUCTURAL ALUMINUM

Structural aluminum shapes are produced by extrusion. Angles, I beams, and chan-
nels are available in standard sizes and in lengths up to 85 ft. Plates up to 6 in
thick and 200 in wide also may be obtained.

                       TABLE 4.20 Aluminum Association
                       Designations for Wrought
                       Aluminum Alloys

                       Copper                              2xxx
                       Manganese                           3xxx
                       Silicon                             4xxx
                       Magnesium                           5xxx
                       Magnesium and silicon               6xxx
                       Zinc                                7xxx
                       Other elements                      8xxx
                       Unused series                       9xxx
                                         BUILDING MATERIALS                                            4.77


TABLE 4.21 Basic Temper Designations for Wrought Aluminum Alloys*

ⴚF        As fabricated. This designation applies to the products of shaping processes in
            which no special control over thermal conditions or strain hardening is
            employed. For wrought products, there are no mechanical property limits.
ⴚO        Annealed. This designation applies to wrought products annealed to obtain the
            lowest-strength temper, and to cast products annealed to improve ductility and
            dimensional stability.
ⴚH†       Strain hardened (wrought products only). This designation applies to products
            that have their strength increased by strain hardening, with or without
            supplementary thermal treatments to produce some reduction in strengths. The H
            is always followed by two or more digits.
ⴚW        Solution heat treated. An unstable temper applicable only to alloys that
            spontaneously age at room temperature after solution heat treatment. This
            designation is specific only when the period of natural aging is indicated: for
            example W 1⁄2 hr.
ⴚT‡       Thermally treated to produce stable tempers other than F, O, or H. This
            designation applies to products that are thermally treated, with or without
            supplementary strain hardening, to produce stable tempers. The T is always
            followed by one or more digits.
    * Recommended by the Aluminum Association.
    † A digit after H represents a specific combination of basic operations, such as H1—strain hardened
only. H2—strain hardened and partly annealed, and H3—strain hardened and stabilized. A second digit
indicates the degree of strain hardening, which ranges from 0 for annealing to 9 in the order of increasing
tensile strength.
    ‡ A digit after T indicates a type of heat treatment, which may include cooling, cold working, and aging.



    There are economic advantages in selecting structural aluminum shapes more
efficient for specific purposes than the customary ones. For example, sections such
as hollow tubes, shapes with stiffening lips on outstanding flanges, and stiffened
panels can be formed by extrusion.
    Aluminum alloys generally weigh about 170 lb / ft3, about one-third that of struc-
tural steel. The modulus of elasticity in tension is about 10,000 ksi, compared with
29,000 ksi for structural steel. Poisson’s ratio may be taken as 0.50. The coefficient
of thermal expansion in the 68 to 212⬚F range is about 0.000013 in / in 䡠 ⬚F, about
double that of structural steel.
    Alloy 6061-T6 is often used for structural shapes and plates. ASTM B308 spec-
ifies a minimum tensile strength of 38 ksi, minimum tensile yield strength of 35
ksi, and minimum elongation in 2 in of 10%, but 8% when the thickness is less
than 1⁄4 in.
    The preceding data indicate that, because of the low modulus of elasticity, alu-
minum members have good energy absorption. Where stiffness is important, how-
ever, the effect of the low modulus should be taken into account. Specific data for
an application should be obtained from the producers.


4.54     WELDING AND BRAZING OF ALUMINUM

Weldability and brazing properties of aluminum alloys depend heavily on their
composition and heat treatment. Most of the wrought alloys can be brazed and
welded, but sometimes only by special processes. The strength of some alloys
4.78                                       SECTION FOUR


         TABLE 4.22 Finishes for Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys

                                Types of finish                                 Designation*
         Mechanical finishes:
           As fabricated                                                             M1Y
           Buffed                                                                    M2Y
           Directional textured                                                      M3Y
           Nondirectional textured                                                   M4Y
         Chemical finishes:
           Nonetched cleaned                                                         C1Y
           Etched                                                                    C2Y
           Brightened                                                                C3Y
           Chemical conversion coatings                                              C4Y
         Coatings:
           Anodic
             General                                                                 A1Y
             Protective and decorative (less than 0.4 mil thick)                     A2Y
             Architectural Class II (0.4–0.7 mil thick)                              A3Y
             Architectural Class I (0.7 mil or more thick)                           A4Y
           Resinous and other organic coatings                                       R1Y
           Vitreous coatings                                                         V1Y
           Electroplated and other metallic coatings                                 E1Y
           Laminated coatings                                                        L1Y
             * Y represents digits (0, 1, 2, . . . 9) or X (to be specified) that describe the
         surface, such as specular, satin, matte, degreased, clear anodizing or type of coating.




depends on heat treatment after welding. Alloys heat treated and artificially aged
are susceptible to loss of strength at the weld, because weld is essentially cast. For
this reason, high-strength structural alloys are commonly fabricated by riveting or
bolting, rather than by welding.
   Brazing is done by furnace, torch, or dip methods. Successful brazing is done
with special fluxes.
   Inert-gas shielded-arc welding is usually used for welding aluminum alloys. The
inert gas, argon or helium, inhibits oxide formation during welding. The electrode
used may be consumable metal or tungsten. The gas metal arc is generally preferred
for structural welding, because of the higher speeds that can be used. The gas
tungsten arc is preferred for thicknesses less than 1⁄2 in.
   Butt-welded joints of annealed aluminum alloys and non-heat-treatable alloys
have nearly the same strength as the parent metal. This is not true for strain-
hardened or heat-tempered alloys. In these conditions, the heat of welding weakens
the metal in the vicinity of the weld. The tensile strength of a butt weld of alloy
6061-T6 may be reduced to 24 ksi, about two-thirds that of the parent metal. Tensile
yield strength of such butt welds may be only 15 to 20 ksi, depending on metal
thickness and type of filler wire used in welding.
   Fillet welds similarly weaken heat-treated alloys. The shear strength of alloy
6061-T6 decreases from about 27 ksi to 17 ksi or less for a fillet weld.
   Welds should be made to meet the requirements of the American Welding So-
ciety, ‘‘Structural Welding Code—Aluminum,’’ AWS D1.2.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                               4.79


4.55   BOLTED AND RIVETED ALUMINUM
       CONNECTIONS

Aluminum connections also may be bolted or riveted. Bolted connections are bear-
ing type. Slip-critical connections, which depend on the frictional resistance of
joined parts created by bolt tension, are not usually employed because of the rel-
atively low friction and the potential relaxation of the bolt tension over time.
    Bolts may be aluminum or steel. Bolts made of aluminum alloy 7075-T73 have
a minimum expected shear strength of 40 ksi. Cost per bolt, however, is higher
than that of 2024-T4 or 6061-T6, with tensile strengths of 37 and 27 ksi, respec-
tively. Steel bolts may be used if the bolt material is selected to prevent galvanic
corrosion or the steel is insulated from the aluminum. One option is use of stainless
steel. Another alternative is to galvanize, aluminize, or cadmium plate the steel
bolts.
    Rivets typically are made of aluminum alloys. They are usually driven cold by
squeeze-type riveters. Alloy 6053-T61, with a shear strength of 20 ksi, is preferred
for joining relatively soft alloys, such as 6063-T5, Alloy 6061-T6, with a shear
strength of 26 ksi, is usually used for joining 6061-T6 and other relatively hard
alloys.


4.56   PREVENTION OF CORROSION OF
       ALUMINUM

Although aluminum ranks high in the electromotive series of the metals, it is highly
corrosion resistant because of the tough, transparent, tenacious film of aluminum
oxide that rapidly forms on any exposed surface. It is this corrosion resistance that
recommends aluminum for building applications. For most exposures, including
industrial and seacoast atmospheres, the alloys normally recommended are ade-
quate, particularly if used in usual thicknesses and if mild pitting is not objection-
able.
    Pure aluminum is the most corrosion resistant of all and is used alone or as
cladding on strong-alloy cores where maximum resistance is wanted. Of the alloys,
those containing magnesium, manganese, chromium, or magnesium and silicon in
the form of MgSi2 are highly resistant to corrosion. The alloys containing substan-
tial proportions of copper are more susceptible to corrosion, depending markedly
on the heat treatment.
    Certain precautions should be taken in building. Aluminum is subject to attack
by alkalies, and it should therefore be protected from contact with wet concrete,
mortar, and plaster. Clear methacrylate lacquers or strippable plastic coatings are
recommended for interiors and methacrylate lacquer for exterior protection during
construction. Strong alkaline and acid cleaners should be avoided and muriatic acid
should not be used on masonry surfaces adjacent to aluminum. If aluminum must
be contiguous to concrete and mortar outdoors, or where it will be wet, it should
be insulated from direct contact by asphalts, bitumens, felts, or other means. As is
true of other metals, atmospheric-deposited dirt must be removed to maintain good
appearance.
    Electrolytic action between aluminum and less active metals should be avoided,
because the aluminum then becomes anodic. If aluminum must be in touch with
4.80                                SECTION FOUR


other metals, the faying surfaces should be insulated by painting with asphaltic or
similar paints, or by gasketing. Steel rivets and bolts, for example, should be in-
sulated. Drainage from copper-alloy surfaces onto aluminum must be avoided. Fre-
quently, steel surfaces can be galvanized or cadmium-coated where contact is ex-
pected with aluminum. The zinc or cadmium coating is anodic to the aluminum
and helps to protect it.



4.57   ALUMINUM BIBLIOGRAPHY

‘‘Aluminum Standards and Data,’’ ‘‘Engineering Data for Aluminum Structures,’’
‘‘Designation Systems for Aluminum Finishes,’’ and ‘‘Specifications for Aluminum
Structures,’’ The Aluminum Association, Washington, D.C.
   E. H. Gaylord, Jr., and C. N. Gaylord, ‘‘Structural Engineering Handbook,’’ 3rd
ed., McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.



COPPER AND COPPER-BASED ALLOYS

Copper and its alloys are widely used in the building industry for a large variety
of purposes, particularly applications requiring corrosion resistance, high electrical
conductivity, strength, ductility, impact resistance, fatigue resistance, or other spe-
cial characteristics possessed by copper or its alloys. Some of the special charac-
teristics of importance to building are ability to be formed into complex shapes,
appearance, and high thermal conductivity, although many of the alloys have low
thermal conductivity and low electrical conductivity as compared with the pure
metal.



4.58   COPPER

The excellent corrosion resistance of copper makes it suitable for such applications
as roofing, flashing, cornices, gutters, downspouts, leaders, fly screens, and similar
applications. For roofing and flashing, soft-annealed copper is employed, because
it is ductile and can easily be bent into various shapes. For gutters, leaders, down-
spouts, and similar applications, cold-rolled hard copper is employed, because its
greater hardness and stiffness permit it to stand without large numbers of inter-
mediate supports.
    Copper and copper-based alloys, particularly the brasses, are employed for water
pipe in buildings, because of their corrosion resistance. Electrolytic tough-pitch
copper is usually employed for electrical conductors, but for maximum electrical
conductivity and weldability, oxygen-free high-conductivity copper is used.
    When arsenic is added to copper, it appears to form a tenacious adherent film,
which is particularly resistant to pitting corrosion. Phosphorus is a powerful de-
oxidizer and is particularly useful for copper to be used for refrigerator tubing and
other applications where flaring, flanging, and spinning are required. Arsenic and
phosphorus both reduce the electrical conductivity of the copper.
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.81


   For flashing, copper is frequently coated with lead to avoid the green patina
formed on copper that is sometimes objectionable when it is washed down over
adjacent surfaces, such as ornamental stone. The patina is formed particularly in
industrial atmospheres. In rural atmospheres, where industrial gases are absent, the
copper normally turns to a deep brown color.
   Principal types of copper and typical uses are:
   Electrolytic tough pitch (99.90% copper) is used for electrical conductors—
bus bars, commutators, etc.; building products—roofing, gutters, etc.; process
equipment—kettles, vats, distillery equipment; forgings. General properties are high
electrical conductivity, high thermal conductivity, and excellent working ability.
   Deoxidized (99.90% copper and 0.025% phosphorus) is used, in tube form, for
water and refrigeration service, oil burners, etc.; in sheet and plate form, for welded
construction. General properties include higher forming and bending qualities than
electrolytic copper. They are preferred for coppersmithing and welding (because of
resistance to embrittlement at high temperatures).



4.59     BRASS

A considerable range of brasses is obtainable for a large variety of end uses. The
high ductility and malleability of the copper-zinc alloys, or brasses, make them
suitable for operations like deep drawing, bending, and swaging. They have a wide
range of colors. They are generally less expensive than the high-copper alloys.
   Grain size of the metal has a marked effect upon its mechanical properties. For
deep drawing and other heavy working operations, a large grain size is required,
but for highly finished polished surfaces, the grain size must be small.
   Like copper, brass is hardened by cold working. Hardnesses are sometimes ex-
pressed as quarter hard, half hard, hard, extra hard, spring, and extra spring, cor-
responding to reductions in cross section during cold working ranging from ap-
proximately 11 to 69%. Hardness is strongly influenced by alloy composition,
original grain size, and form (strip, rod, tube, wire).


4.59.1   Plain Brass

Brass compositions range from higher copper content to zinc contents as high as
40% or more. Brasses with less than 36% zinc are plain alpha solid solutions; but
Muntz metal, with 40% zinc, contains both alpha and beta phases.
    The principal plain brasses of interest in building, and their properties are:
    Commercial bronze, 90% (90.0% copper, 10.0% zinc). Typical uses are forg-
ings, screws, weatherstripping, and stamped hardware. General properties include
excellent cold working and high ductility.
    Red brass, 85% (85.0% copper, 15.0% zinc). Typical uses are dials, hardware,
etched parts, automobile radiators, and tube and pipe for plumbing. General prop-
erties are higher strength and ductility than copper, and excellent corrosion resis-
tance.
    Cartridge brass, 70% (70.0% copper, 30.0% zinc). Typical uses are deep draw-
ing, stamping, spinning, etching, rolling—for practically all fabricating processes—
cartridge cases, pins, rivets, eyelets, heating units, lamp bodies and reflectors, elec-
4.82                               SECTION FOUR


trical sockets, drawn shapes, etc. General properties are best combination of duc-
tility and strength of any brass, and excellent cold-working properties.
    Muntz metal (60.0% copper, 40.0% zinc). Typical uses are sheet form, perfo-
rated metal, architectural work, condenser tubes, valve stems, and brazing rods.
General properties are high strength combined with low ductility.


4.59.2   Leaded Brass

Lead is added to brass to improve its machinability, particularly in such applications
as automatic screw machines where a freely chipping metal is required. Leaded
brasses cannot easily be cold-worked by such operations as flaring, upsetting, or
cold heading. Several leaded brasses of importance in the building field are the
following:
    High-leaded brass (64.0% copper, 34.0% zinc, 2.0% lead). Typical uses are
engraving plates, machined parts, instruments (professional and scientific), name-
plates, keys, lock parts, and tumblers. General properties are free machining and
good blanking.
    Forging brass (60.0% copper, 38.0% zinc, 2.0% lead). Typical uses are hot
forging, hardware, and plumbing goods. General properties are extreme plasticity
when hot and a combination of good corrosion resistance with excellent mechanical
properties.
    Architectural bronze (56.5% copper, 41.25% zinc, 2.25% lead). Typical uses
are handrails, decorative moldings, grilles, revolving door parts, miscellaneous ar-
chitectural trim, industrial extruded shapes (hinges, lock bodies, automotive parts).
General properties are excellent forging and free-machining properties.


4.59.3   Tin Brass

Tin is added to a variety of basic brasses to obtain hardness, strength, and other
properties that would otherwise not be available. Two important alloys are:
   Admiralty (71.0% copper, 28.0% zinc, 1.0% tin, 0.05% arsenic). Typical uses
are condenser and heat-exchanger plates and tubes, steam-power-plant equipment,
chemical and process equipment, and marine uses. General properties are excellent
corrosion resistance, combined with strength and ductility.
   Manganese bronze (58.5% copper, 39.0% zinc, 1.4% iron, 1.0% tin, 0.1% man-
ganese). Typical uses are forgings, condenser plates, valve stems, and coal screens.
General properties are high strength combined with excellent wear resistance.



4.60     NICKEL SILVERS

These are alloys of copper, nickel, and zinc. Depending on the composition, they
range in color from a definite to slight pink cast through yellow, green, whitish
green, whitish blue, to blue. A wide range of nickel silvers is made, of which only
one typical composition will be described. Those that fall in the combined alpha-
beta phase of metals are readily hot-worked and therefore are fabricated without
difficulty into such intricate shapes as plumbing fixtures, stair rails, architectural
shapes, and escalator parts. Lead may be added to improve machining.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.83


   Nickel, silver, 18% (A) (65.0% copper, 17.0% zinc, 18.0% nickel). Typical uses
are hardware, architectural panels, lighting, electrical and plumbing fixtures. Gen-
eral properties are high resistance to corrosion and tarnish, malleable, and ductile.
Color: silver-blue-white.


4.61     CUPRONICKEL

Copper and nickel are alloyed in a variety of compositions of which the high-
copper alloys are called the cupronickels. Typical commercial types of cupronickel
contain 10 or 30% nickel (Table 4.15):
   Cupronickel, 10% (88.5% copper, 10% nickel, 1.5% iron). Recommended for
applications requiring corrosion resistance, especially to salt water, as in tubing for
condensers, heat exchangers, and formed sheets.
   Cupronickel, 30% (70.0% copper, 30.0% nickel). Typical uses are condenser
tubes and plates, tanks, vats, vessels, process equipment, automotive parts, meters,
refrigerator pump valves. General properties are high strength and ductility and
resistance to corrosion and erosion. Color: white-silver.


4.62     BRONZE

Originally, the bronzes were all alloys of copper and tin. Today, the term bronze is
generally applied to engineering metals having high mechanical properties and the
term brass to other metals. The commercial wrought bronzes do not usually contain
more than 10% tin because the metal becomes extremely hard and brittle. When
phosphorus is added as a deoxidizer, to obtain sound, dense castings, the alloys are
known as phosphor bronzes. The two most commonly used tin bronzes contain 5
or 8% tin. Both have excellent cold-working properties.


4.62.1   Silicon Bronze

These are high-copper alloys containing percentages of silicon ranging from about
1% to slightly more than 3%. In addition, they generally contain one or more of
the four elements, tin, manganese, zinc, and iron. A typical one is high-silicon
bronze, type A.
   High-silicon bronze, A (96.0% copper, 3.0% silicon, 1.0% manganese). Typical
users are tanks—pressure vessels, vats; weatherstrips, forgings. General properties
are corrosion resistance of copper and mechanical properties of mild steel.


4.62.2   Aluminum Bronze

Like aluminum, these bronzes form an aluminum oxide skin on the surface, which
materially improves resistance to corrosion, particularly under acid conditions.
Since the color of the 5% aluminum bronze is similar to that of 18-carat gold, it
is used for costume jewelry and other decorative purposes. Aluminum-silicon
bronzes are used in applications requiring high tensile properties in combination
4.84                               SECTION FOUR


with good corrosion resistance in such parts as valves, stems, air pumps, condenser
bolts, and similar applications. Their wear-resisting properties are good; conse-
quently, they are used in slide liners and bushings.




4.63   COPPER BIBLIOGRAPHY

‘‘Alloy Data,’’ Copper Development Association, New York, N.Y.
   G. S. Brady and H. R. Clauser, ‘‘Materials Handbook,’’ 13th ed., and J. H.
Callender, ‘‘Time-Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data,’’ 6th ed.,
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.




LEAD AND LEAD-BASED ALLOYS

Lead is used primarily for its corrosion resistance. Lead roofs 2000 years old are
still intact.




4.64   APPLICATIONS OF LEAD

Exposure tests indicate corrosion penetrations of sheet lead ranging from less than
0.0001 in to less than 0.0003 in in 10 years in atmospheres ranging from mild rural
to severe industrial and seacoast locations. Sheet lead is therefore used for roofing,
flashing, spandrels, gutters, and downspouts.
    Because the green patina found on copper may wash away sufficiently to stain
the surrounding structure, lead-coated copper is frequently employed. ASTM B101-
78 covers two classes, defined by the weight of coating.
    Lead pipe should not be used for the transport of drinking water. Distilled and
very soft waters slowly dissolve lead and may cause cumulative lead poisoning.
Hard waters apparently deposit a protective coating on the wall of the pipe and
little or no lead is subsequently dissolved in the water.
    Principal alloying elements used with building leads are antimony (for hardness
and strength) and tin. But copper, arsenic, bismuth, nickel, zinc, silver, iron, and
manganese are also added in varying proportions.
    Soft solders consist of varying percentages of lead and tin. For greater hardness,
antimony is added, and for higher-temperature solders, silver is added in small
amounts. ASTM Standard B32 specifies properties of soft solders.
    Low-melting alloys and many bearing metals are alloys of lead, bismuth, tin,
cadmium, and other metals including silver, zinc, indium, and antimony. The fusible
links used in sprinkler heads and fire-door closures, made of such alloys, have a
low melting point, usually lower than the boiling point of water. Yield (softening)
temperatures range from 73 to 160⬚F and melting points from about 80 to 480⬚F,
depending on the composition.
                                  BUILDING MATERIALS                           4.85


4.65   LEAD BIBLIOGRAPHY

American Society for Metals, Cleveland, Ohio: ‘‘Metals Handbook.’’



NICKEL AND NICKEL-BASED ALLOYS

Nickel is used mostly as an alloying element with other metals, but it finds use in
its own right, largely as electroplate or as cladding metal. Among the principal
high-nickel alloys are Monel and Inconel. The nominal compositions of these met-
als are given in Table 4.23



4.66   PROPERTIES OF NICKEL AND ITS ALLOYS

Nickel is resistant to alkaline corrosion under nonoxidizing conditions but is cor-
roded by oxidizing acids and oxidizing salts. It is resistant to fatty acids, other
mildly acid conditions, such as food processing and beverages, and resists oxidation
at temperatures as high as 1600⬚F.
    Monel is widely used in kitchen equipment. It is better than nickel in reducing
conditions like warm unaerated acids, and better than copper under oxidizing con-
ditions, such as aerated acids, alkalies, and salt solutions. It is widely used for
handling chlorides of many kinds.
    Inconel is almost completely resistant to corrosion by food products, pharma-
ceuticals, biologicals, and dilute organic acids. It is superior to nickel and Monel


TABLE 4.23 Composition of Nickel Alloys

              Nickel
              alloy,                                            70–30       90–10
               low-       Nickel                                cupro-      cupro-
             carbon       alloy         Monel      Inconel       nickel      nickel
             NO2201      NO2200        NO4400      NO6600       C71500      C70600
              ASTM        ASTM          ASTM        ASTM        ASTM        ASTM
 Content      B160        B160          B127        B168        B171        B171
Carbon         0.02        0.15            0.2     0.15 max
Manganese      0.35        0.35        2.00 max     1.0 max     1.0 max     1.0 max
Sulfur         0.01        0.01        0.024 max   0.015 max
Silicon        0.35        0.35            0.5      0.5 max
Chromium                                             14–17
Nickel        99 min      99 min        63–70        72 min      29–33       9–11
Copper          0.25        0.25      Remainder     0.5 max     65 min     86.5 min
Iron         0.40 max    0.40 max      2.5 max        6–10     0.40–1.0     1.0–1.8
Lead                                                           0.05 max    0.05 max
Zinc                                                              1.0         1.0
4.86                                   SECTION FOUR


in resisting oxidizing acid salts like chromates and nitrates but is not resistant to
ferric, cupric, or mercuric chlorides. It resists scaling and oxidation in air and
furnace atmospheres at temperatures up to 2000⬚F.



4.67    NICKEL BIBLIOGRAPHY

International Nickel Co., New York: ‘‘Nickel and Nickel Alloys.’’
   Albert Hoerson, Jr.: ‘‘Nonferrous-clad Plate Steels,’’ Chap. 13 in A. G. H. Dietz,
‘‘Composite Engineering Laminates,’’ M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass.



PLASTICS

The synonymous terms plastics and synthetic resins denote synthetic organic high
polymers, all of which are plastic at some stage in their manufacture. Plastics fall
into two large categories—thermoplastic and thermosetting materials.



4.68    GENERAL PROPERTIES OF PLASTICS

Thermoplastics may be softened by heating and hardened by cooling any number
of times. Thermosetting materials are either originally soft or liquid, or they soften
                                                   once upon heating; but upon further
                                                   heating, they harden permanently. Some
                                                   thermosetting materials harden by an in-
                                                   terlinking mechanism in which water or
                                                   other by-product is given off, by a pro-
                                                   cess called condensation; but others,
                                                   like the unsaturated polyesters, harden
                                                   by a direct interlinking of the basic mol-
                                                   ecules without release of a by-product.
                                                       Most plastics are modified with plas-
                                                   ticizers, fillers, or other ingredients.
                                                   Consequently, each base material forms
                                                   the nucleus for a large number of prod-
                                                   ucts having a wide variety of properties.
                                                   This section can only indicate generally
                                                   the range of properties to be expected.
                                                       Because plastics are quite different in
                                                   their composition and structure from
                                                   other materials, such as metals, their be-
                                                   havior under stress and under other con-
FIGURE 4.5 Stress-strain diagram shows the ditions is likely to be different from
influence of temperature, plasticizer, and rate of other materials. Just as steel and lead are
loading on behavior of plastics.                   markedly different and are used for dif-
                                                   ferent applications, so the various plas-
tics materials—some hard and brittle, others soft and extensible—must be designed
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.87


on different bases and used in different ways. Some plastics show no yield point,
because they fail before a yield point can be reached. Others have a moderately
high elastic range, followed by a highly plastic range. Still others are highly exten-
sible and are employed at stresses far beyond the yield point.
    More than many other materials, plastics are sensitive to temperature and to the
rate and time of application of load. How these parameters influence the properties
is indicated in a general way in Fig. 4.5, which shows that for many plastics in
increase in temperature, increase in plasticizer content, and decrease in rate of load
application mean an increase in strain to fracture, accompanied by a decrease in
maximum stress. This viscoelastic behavior, combining elastic and viscous or plas-
tic reaction to stress, is unlike the behavior of materials which are traditionally
considered to behave only elastically.



4.69   FILLERS AND PLASTICIZERS

Fillers are commonly added, particularly to the thermosetting plastics, to alter their
basic characteristics. For example, wood flour converts a hard, brittle resin, difficult
to handle, into a cheaper, more easily molded material for general purposes. As-
bestos fibers provide better heat resistance; mica gives better electrical properties;
and a variety of fibrous materials, such as chopped fibers, chopped fabric, and
chopped tire cords, increase the strength and impact properties.
    Plasticizers are added to many thermoplastics, primarily to transform hard and
rigid materials into a variety of forms having varying degrees of softness, flexibility,
and strength. In addition, dyes or pigments, stabilizers, and other products may be
added.



4.70   MOLDING AND FABRICATING METHODS
       FOR PLASTICS

Both thermosetting and thermoplastic molding materials are formed into final shape
by a variety of molding and fabricating methods.
   Thermosetting materials are commonly formed by placing molding powder or
molded preform in heated dies and compressing under heat and pressure into the
final infusible shape. Or they are formed by forcing heat-softened material into a
heated die for final forming into the hard infusible shape.
   Thermoplastics are commonly formed by injection molding, that is, by forcing
soft, hot plastic into a cold die, where it hardens by cooling. Continuous profiles
of thermoplastic materials are made by extrusion. Thermoplastic sheets, especially
transparent acrylics, are frequently formed into final shape by heating and then
blowing to final form under compressed air or by drawing a partial vacuum against
the softened sheet.
   Foamed plastics are employed for thermal insulation in refrigerators, buildings,
and many other applications. In buildings, plastics are either prefoamed into slabs,
blocks, or other appropriate shapes, or they are foamed in place.
   Prefoamed materials, such as polystyrene, are made by adding a blowing agent
and extruding the mixture under pressure and at elevated temperatures. As the
material emerges from the extruder, it expands into a large ‘‘log’’ that can be cut
4.88                                 SECTION FOUR


into desired shapes. The cells are ‘‘closed’’; that is, they are not interconnecting
and are quite impermeable.
   Foamed-in-place plastics are made with pellets or liquids. The pellets, made, for
example, of polystyrene, are poured into the space to be occupied, such as a mold,
and heated, whereupon they expand and occupy the space. The resulting mass may
be permeable between pellets. Liquid-based foams, exemplified by polyurethane,
are made by mixing liquid ingredients and immediately casting the mixture into
the space to be occupied. A quick reaction results in a foam that rises and hardens
by a thermosetting reaction. When blown with fluorocarbon gases, such forms have
exceptionally low thermal conductivities.
   All the plastics can be machined, if proper allowance is made for the properties
of the materials.
   Plastics are often combined with sheet or mat stocks, such as paper, cotton
muslin, glass fabric, glass filament mats, nylon fabric, and other fabrics, to provide
laminated materials in which the properties of the combined plastic and sheet stock
are quite different from the properties of either constituent by itself. Two principal
varieties of laminates are commonly made: (1) High-pressure laminates employing
condensation-type thermosetting materials, which are formed at elevated tempera-
tures and pressures. (2) Reinforced plastics employing unsaturated polyesters and
epoxides, from which no by-products are given off, and consequently, either low
pressures or none at all may be required to form combinations of these materials
with a variety of reinforcing agents, like glass fabric or mat.



4.71    THERMOSETTING PLASTICS

General properties of thermosetting plastics are described in Art. 4.68. Following
are properties of several thermosetting plastics used in buildings:

Phenol Formaldehyde. These materials provide the greatest variety of thermo-
setting molded plastic articles. They are used for chemical, decorative, electrical,
mechanical, and thermal applications of all kinds. Hard and rigid, they change
slightly, if at all, on aging indoors but, on outdoor exposure, lose their bright surface
gloss. However, the outdoor-exposure characteristics of the more durable formula-
tions are otherwise generally good. Phenol formaldehydes have good electrical
properties, do not burn readily, and do not support combustion. They are strong,
light in weight, and generally pleasant to the eye and touch, although light colors
by and large are not obtainable because of the fairly dark-brown basic color of the
resin. They have low water absorption and good resistance to attack by most com-
monly found chemicals.

Epoxy and Polyester Casting Resins. These are used for a large variety of pur-
poses. For example, electronic parts with delicate components are sometimes cast
completely in these materials to give them complete and continuous support, and
resistance to thermal and mechanical shock. Some varieties must be cured at ele-
vated temperatures; others can be formulated to be cured at room temperatures.
One of the outstanding attributes of the epoxies is their excellent adhesion to a
variety of materials, including such metals as copper, brass, steel, and aluminum.
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.89


Polyester Molding Materials. When compounded with fibers, particularly glass
fibers, or with various mineral fillers, including clay, the polyesters can be formu-
lated into putties or premixes that are easily compression- or transfer-molded into
parts having high impact resistance. Polyesters are often used in geotextiles (Art.
6.11.2).

Melamine Formaldehyde. These materials are unaffected by common organic sol-
vents, greases, and oils, as well as most weak acids and alkalies. Their water ab-
sorption is low. They are insensitive to heat and are highly flame-resistant, depend-
ing on the filler. Electrical properties are particularly good, especially resistance to
arcing. Unfilled materials are highly translucent and have unlimited color possibil-
ities. Principal fillers are alpha cellulose for general-purpose compounding; minerals
to improve electrical properties, particularly at elevated temperatures; chopped fab-
ric to afford high shock resistance and flexural strength; and cellulose, mainly for
electrical purposes.

Cellulose Acetate Butyrate. The butyrate copolymer is inherently softer and more
flexible than cellulose acetate and consequently requires less plasticizer to achieve
a given degree of softness and flexibility. It is made in the form of clear transparent
sheet and film, or in the form of molding powders, which can be molded by standard
injection-molding procedures into a wide variety of applications. Like the other
cellulosics, this material is inherently tough and has good impact resistance. It has
infinite colorability, like the other cellulosics. Cellulose acetate butyrate tubing is
used for such applications as irrigation and gas lines.

Cellulose Nitrate. One of the toughest of the plastics, cellulose nitrate is widely
used for tool handles and similar applications requiring high impact strength. The
high flammability requires great caution, particularly in the form of film. Most
commercial photographic film is cellulose nitrate as opposed to safety film.

Polyurethane. This plastic is used in several ways in building. As thermal insu-
lation, it is used in the form of foam, either prefoamed or foamed in place. The
latter is particularly useful in irregular spaces. When blown with fluorocarbons, the
foam has an exceptionally low K-factor and is, therefore, widely used in thin-walled
refrigerators. Other uses include field-applied or baked-on clear or colored coatings
and finishes for floors, walls, furniture, and casework generally. The rubbery form
is employed for sprayed or troweled-on roofing, and for gaskets and calking com-
pounds.

Urea Formaldehyde. Like the melamines, these offer unlimited translucent to
opaque color possibilities, light-fastness, good mechanical and electrical properties,
and resistance to organic solvents as well as mild acids and alkalies. Although there
is no swelling or change in appearance, the water absorption of urea formaldehyde
is relatively high, and it is therefore not recommended for applications involving
long exposure to water. Occasional exposure to water is without deleterious effect.
Strength properties are good, although special shock-resistant grades are not made.

Silicones. Unlike other plastics, silicones are based on silicon rather than carbon.
As a consequence, their inertness and durability under a wide variety of conditions
are outstanding. As compared with the phenolics, their mechanical properties are
poor, and consequently glass fibers are added. Molding is more difficult than with
4.90                                SECTION FOUR


other thermosetting materials. Unlike most other resins, they may be used in con-
tinuous operations at 400⬚F; they have very low water absorption; their dielectric
properties are excellent over an extremely wide variety of chemical attack; and
under outdoor conditions their durability is particularly outstanding. In liquid so-
lutions, silicones are used to impart moisture resistance to masonry walls and to
fabrics. They also form the basis for a variety of paints and other coatings capable
of maintaining flexibility and inertness to attack at high temperatures in the presence
of ultraviolet sunlight and ozone. Silicone rubbers maintain their flexibility at much
lower temperatures than other rubbers.



4.72   THERMOPLASTIC RESINS

Materials under this heading in general can be softened by heating and hardened
by cooling.

Acrylics. In the form of large transparent sheets, these are used in aircraft enclo-
sures and building construction. Although not so hard as glass, they have perfect
clarity and transparency. Among the most resistant of the transparent plastics to
sunlight and outdoor weathering, they possess an optimum combination of flexi-
bility and sufficient rigidity with resistance to shattering. A wide variety of trans-
parent, translucent, and opaque colors can be produced. The sheets are readily
formed to complex shapes. They are used for such applications as transparent win-
dows, outdoor and indoor signs, parts of lighting equipment, decorative and func-
tional automotive parts, reflectors, household-appliance parts, and similar applica-
tions. They can be used as large sheets, molded from molding powders, or cast
from the liquid monomer.

Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS). This three-way copolymer provides a
family of tough, hard, chemically resistant resins with many grades and varieties,
depending on variations in constituents. The greatest use is for pipes and fittings,
especially drain-waste-vent (DWV). Other uses include buried sewer and water
lines, mine pipe, well casings, conduit, and appliance housings.

Polyethylene. In its unmodified form, this is a flexible, waxy, translucent plastic.
It maintain flexibility at very low temperatures, in contrast with many other ther-
moplastic materials.
    Polyethylene may be provided as low-density, or standard, or as high-density or
linear material. High-density polyethylene has greater strength and stiffness, with-
stands somewhat higher temperatures, and has a more sharply defined softening
temperature range. The heat-distortion point of the low-density polyethylenes is
low; these plastics are not recommended for uses above 150⬚F. Unlike most plastics,
polyethylene is partly crystalline. It is highly inert to solvents and corrosive chem-
icals of all kinds at ordinary temperatures. Usually low moisture permeability and
absorption are combined with excellent electrical properties. Its density is lower
than that of any other commercially available nonporous plastic. It is widely used
as a primary insulating material on wire and cable and has been used as a replace-
ment for the lead jacket in communication cables and other cables. It is widely
used also in geogrids, geonets, and geomembranes (Art. 6.11) and as corrosionproof
lining for tanks and other chemical equipment.
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                                4.91


Polypropylene. This polyolefin is similar in many ways to its counterpart, poly-
ethylene, but is generally harder, stronger, and more temperature-resistant. It finds
a great many uses, among them piping, geotextiles, and geogrids (Art. 6.11), and
complete water cisterns for water closets in plumbing systems.

Polycarbonate. Excellent transparency, high impact resistance, and good resis-
tance to weathering combine to recommend this plastic for safety glazing and for
general illumination and shatter-resistant fixtures. It is available in large, clear,
tinted, and opaque sheets that can be formed into shells, domes, globes, and other
forms. It can be processed by standard molding methods.

Polytetrafluorethylene. This is a highly crystalline liner-type polymer, unique
among organic compounds in its chemical inertness and resistance to change at
high and low temperatures. Its electrical properties are excellent. Its outstanding
property is extreme resistance to attack by corrosive agents and solvents of all kinds.
Waxy and self-lubricating, polytetrafluoroethylene is used in buildings where resis-
tance to extreme conditions or low friction is desired. In steam lines, for example,
supporting pads of this plastic permit the lines to slide easily over the pads. The
temperatures involved have little or no effect. Other low-friction applications in-
clude, for example, bearings for girders and trusses. Mechanical properties are only
moderately high, and reinforcement may be necessary to prevent creep and squeeze-
out under heavy loads. These fluorocarbons are difficult to wet; consequently, they
are often used as parting agents, or where sticky materials must be handled.

Polyvinylfluoride. This has much of the superior inertness to chemical and weath-
ering attack typical of the fluorocarbons. Among other uses, it is used as thin-film
overlays for building boards to be exposed outdoors.

Polyvinyl Formal and Polyvinyl Butyral. Polyvinyl formal resins are principally
used as a base for tough, water-resistant insulating enamel for electric wire. Poly-
vinyl butyral is the tough interlayer in safety glass. In its cross-linked and plasti-
cized form, polyvinyl butyral is extensively used in coating fabrics for raincoats,
upholstery, and other heavy-duty moisture-resistant applications.

Vinyl Chloride Polymers and Copolymers. Polyvinyl chloride is naturally hard
and rigid but can be plasticized to any required degree of flexibility as in raincoats
and shower curtains. Copolymers, including vinyl chloride plus vinyl acetate, are
naturally flexible without plasticizers. Nonrigid vinyl plastics are widely used as
insulation and jacketing for electric wire and cable because of their electrical prop-
erties and their resistance to oil and water. Thin films are used in geomembranes
(Art. 6.11). Vinyl chlorides also are used for floor coverings in the form of tile and
sheet because of their abrasion resistance and relatively low water absorption. The
rigid materials are used for tubing, pipe, and many other applications where their
resistance to corrosion and action of many chemicals, especially acids and alkalies,
recommends them. They are attacked by a variety of organic solvents, however.
Like all thermoplastics, they soften at elevated temperatures.

Vinylidene Chloride. This material is highly resistant to most inorganic chemicals
and to organic solvents generally. It is impervious to water on prolonged immersion,
and its films are highly resistant to moisture-vapor transmission. It can be sterilized,
if not under load, in boiling water. It is used as pipe for transporting chemicals and
geomembranes (Art. 6.11).
4.92                                SECTION FOUR


Nylon. Molded nylon is used in increasing quantities for impact and high resis-
tance to abrasion. It is employed in small gears, cams, and other machine parts,
because even when unlubricated they are highly resistant to wear. Its chemical
resistance, except to phenols and mineral acids, is excellent. Extruded nylon is
coated onto electric wire, cable, and rope for abrasion resistance. Applications like
hammerheads indicate its impact resistance.

Polystyrene. This is one of the lightest of the presently available commercial
plastics. It is relatively inexpensive, easily molded, has good dimensional stability,
and good stability at low temperatures; it is brilliantly clear when transparent and
has an infinite range of colors. Water absorption is negligible even after long im-
mersion. Electrical characteristics are excellent. It is resistant to most corrosive
chemicals, such as acids, and to a variety of organic solvents, although it is attacked
by others. Polystyrenes as a class are considerably more brittle and less extensible
than many other thermoplastic materials, but these properties are markedly im-
proved in copolymers. Under some conditions, they have a tendency to develop
fine cracks, known as craze marks, on exposure, particularly outdoors. This is true
of many other thermoplastics, especially when highly stressed. It is widely used in
synthetic rubbers.



4.73   ELASTOMERS, OR SYNTHETIC RUBBERS

Rubber for construction purposes is both natural and synthetic. Natural rubber, often
called crude rubber in its unvulcanized form, is composed of large complex mol-
ecules of isoprene. Synthetic rubbers, also known as elastomers, are generally
rubber-like only in their high elasticity. The principal synthetic rubbers are the
following:
    GR-S is the one most nearly like crude rubber and is the product of styrene and
butadiene copolymerization. It is the most widely used of the synthetic rubbers. It
is not oil-resistant but is widely used for tires and similar applications.
    Nitril is a copolymer of acrylonitrile and butadiene. Its excellent resistance to
oils and solvents makes it useful for fuel and solvent hoses, hydraulic-equipment
parts, and similar applications.
    Butyl is made by the copolymerization of isobutylene with a small proportion
of isoprene or butadiene. It has the lowest gas permeability of all the rubbers and
consequently is widely used for making inner tubes for tires and other applications
in which gases must be held with a minimum of diffusion. It is used for gaskets
in buildings.
    Neoprene is made by the polymerization of chloroprene. It has very good me-
chanical properties and is particularly resistant to sunlight, heat, aging, and oil; it
is therefore used for making machine belts, gaskets, oil hose, insulation on wire
cable, and other applications to be used for outdoor exposure, such as roofing, and
gaskets for building and glazing.
    Sulfide rubbers—the polysulfides of high molecular weight—have rubbery
properties, and articles made from them, such as hose and tank linings and glazing
compounds, exhibit good resistance to solvents, oils, ozone, low temperature, and
outdoor exposure.
    Silicone rubber, which also is discussed in Art. 4.71, when made in rubbery
consistency forms a material exhibiting exceptional inertness and temperature re-
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.93


sistance. It is therefore used in making gaskets, electrical insulation, and similar
products that maintain their properties at both high and low temperatures.
    Additional elastomers include polyethylene, cyclized rubber, plasticized poly-
vinyl chloride, and polybutene. A great variety of materials enters into various
rubber compounds and therefore provide a wide range of properties. In addition,
many elastomeric products are laminated structures of rubber-like compounds com-
bined with materials like fabric and metals (Art. 4.76).


COMBINATIONS OF PLASTICS AND OTHER
MATERIALS

Plastics often are used as part of a composite construction with other materials. The
composites may be in the form of laminates, matrix systems, sandwich structures,
or combinations of these.


4.74   HIGH-PRESSURE LAMINATES

Laminated thermosetting products consist of fibrous sheet materials combined with
a thermosetting resin, usually phenol formaldehyde or melamine formaldehyde. The
commonly used sheet materials are paper, cotton fabric, asbestos paper or fabric,
nylon fabric, and glass fabric. The usual form is flat sheet, but a variety of rolled
tubes and rods is made.

Decorative Laminates. These high-pressure laminates consist of a base of phe-
nolic resin-impregnated kraft paper over which a decorative overlay, such as printed
paper, is applied. Over all this is laid a thin sheet of melamine resin. When the
entire assemblage is pressed in a hot-plate press at elevated temperatures and pres-
sures, the various layers are fused together and the melamine provides a completely
transparent finish, resistant to alcohol, water, and common solvents. This material
is widely used for tabletops, counter fronts, wainscots, and similar building appli-
cations. It is customarily bonded to a core of plywood to develop the necessary
thickness and strength. In this case, a backup sheet consisting of phenolic resin and
paper alone, without the decorative surface, is employed to provide balance to the
entire sandwich.


4.75   REINFORCED PLASTICS

These are commonly made with phenolic, polyester, and epoxide resins combined
with various types of reinforcing agents, of which glass fibers in the form of mats
or fabrics are the most common. Because little or no pressure is required to form
large complex parts, rather simple molds can be employed for the manufacture of
such things as boat hulls and similar large parts. In buildings, reinforced plastics
have been rather widely used in the form of corrugated sheet for skylights and side
lighting of buildings, and as molded shells, concrete forms, sandwiches, and similar
applications.
4.94                               SECTION FOUR


    These materials may be formulated to cure at ordinary temperatures, or they
may require moderate temperatures to cure the resins. Customarily, parts are made
by laying up successive layers of the glass fabric or the glass mat and applying the
liquid resin to them. The entire combination is allowed to harden at ordinary tem-
peratures, or it is placed in a heated chamber for final hardening. It may be placed
inside a rubber bag and a vacuum drawn to apply moderate pressure, or it may be
placed between a pair of matching molds and cured under moderate pressure in the
molds.
    The high impact resistance of these materials combined with good strength prop-
erties and good durability recommends them for building applications. When the
quantity of reinforcing agent is kept relatively low, a high degree of translucence
may be achieved, although it is less than that of the acrylics and the other trans-
parent thermoplastic materials.

Fabrics for Air-Supported Roofs. Principal requirements for fabrics and coatings
for air-supported structures are high strip tensile strength in both warp and fill
directions, high tear resistance, good coating adhesion, maximum weathering resis-
tance, maximum joint strength, good flexing resistance, and good flame resistance.
Translucency may or may not be important, depending on the application. The most
commonly used fabrics are nylon, polyester, and glass. Neoprene and Hypalon have
commonly been employed for military and other applications where opacity is de-
sired. For translucent application, vinyl chloride and fluorocarbon polymers are
more common. Careful analysis of loads and stresses, especially dynamic wind
loads, and means of joining sections and attaching to anchorage is required.



4.76   LAMINATED RUBBER

Rubber is often combined with various textiles, fabrics, filaments, and metal wire
to obtain strength, stability, abrasion resistance, and flexibility. Among the lami-
nated materials are the following:

V Belts. These consist of a combination of fabric and rubber, frequently combined
with reinforcing grommets of cotton, rayon, steel, or other high-strength material
extending around the central portion.

Flat Rubber Belting. This laminate is a combination of several plies of cotton
fabric or cord, all bonded together by a soft-rubber compound.

Conveyor Belts. These, in effect, are moving highways used for transporting such
material as crushed rock, dirt, sand, gravel, slag, and similar materials. When the
belt operates at a steep angle, it is equipped with buckets or similar devices and
becomes an elevator belt. A typical conveyor belt consists of cotton duct plies
alternated with thin rubber plies; the assembly is wrapped in a rubber cover, and
all elements are united into a single structure by vulcanization. A conveyor belt to
withstand extreme conditions is made with some textile or metal cords instead of
the woven fabric. Some conveyor belts are especially arranged to assume a trough
form and made to stretch less than similar all-fabric belts.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                               4.95


Rubber-Lined Pipes, Tanks, and Similar Equipment. The lining materials in-
clude all the natural and synthetic rubbers in various degrees of hardness, depending
on the application. Frequently, latex rubber is deposited directly from the latex
solution onto the metal surface to be covered. The deposited layer is subsequently
vulcanized. Rubber linings can be bonded to ordinary steel, stainless steel, brass,
aluminum, concrete, and wood. Adhesion to aluminum is inferior to adhesion to
steel. Covering for brass must be compounded according to the composition of the
metal.

Rubber Hose. Nearly all rubber hose is laminated and composed of layers of
rubber combined with reinforcing materials like cotton duck, textile cords, and
metal wire. Typical hose consists of an inner rubber lining, a number of intermediate
layers consisting of braided cord or cotton duck impregnated with rubber, and
outside that, several more layers of fabric, spirally wound cord, spirally wound
metal, or in some cases, spirally wound flat steel ribbon. Outside of all this is
another layer of rubber to provide resistance to abrasion. Hose for transporting oil,
water, wet concrete under pressure, and for dredging purposes is made of heavy-
duty laminated rubber.

Vibration Insulators. These usually consist of a layer of soft rubber bonded be-
tween two layers of metal. Another type of insulated consists of a rubber tube or
cylinder vulcanized to two concentric metal tubes, the rubber being deflected in
shear. A variant of this consists of a cylinder of soft rubber vulcanized to a tubular
or solid steel core and a steel outer shell, the entire combination being placed in
torsion to act as a spring. Heavy-duty mounts of this type are employed on trucks,
buses, and other applications calling for rugged construction.



4.77   PLASTICS BIBLIOGRAPHY

American Concrete Institute, ‘‘Polymer Modified Concrete,’’ SP-99; ‘‘Polymers in
Concrete,’’ ACI 548; and Guide for the Use of Polymers in Concrete,’’ ACI 548.1.
   American Society of Civil Engineers, ‘‘Structural Plastics Design Manual,’’ and
‘‘Structural Plastics Selection Manual.’’
   ‘‘Modern Plastics Encyclopedia,’’ Plastics Catalog Corp., New York.
   A. G. H. Dietz, ‘‘Plastics for Architects and Engineers,’’ M.I.T. Press, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
   C. A. Harper, ‘‘Handbook of Plastics and Elastomers,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing
Company, New York.
   R. M. Koerner, ‘‘Designing with Geosynthetics,’’ 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Engle-
woods Cliffs, N.J.
   I. Skeist, ‘‘Plastics in Building,’’ Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.



PORCELAIN-ENAMELED PRODUCTS

Porcelain enamel, also known as vitreous enamel, is an aluminum-silicate glass,
which is fused to metal under high heat. Porcelain-enameled metal is used for
4.96                               SECTION FOUR


indoor and outdoor applications because of its hardness, durability, washability, and
color possibilities. For building purposes, porcelain enamel is applied to sheet metal
and cast iron, the former for a variety of purposes including trim, plumbing, and
kitchen fixtures, and the latter almost entirely for plumbing fixtures. Most sheet
metal used for porcelain enameling is steel—low in carbon, manganese, and other
elements. Aluminum is also used for vitreous enamel.



4.78   PORCELAIN ENAMEL ON METAL

Low-temperature softening glasses must be employed, especially with sheet metal,
to avoid the warping and distortion that would occur at high temperatures. To obtain
lower softening temperatures than would be attainable with high-silica glasses, bo-
ron is commonly added. Fluorine may replace some of the oxygen, and lead may
also be added to produce easy-flowing brilliant enamels; but lead presents an oc-
cupational health hazard.
    Composition of the enamel is carefully controlled to provide a coefficient of
thermal expansion as near that of the base metal as possible. If the coefficient of
the enamel is greater than that of the metal, cracking and crazing are likely to
occur, but if the coefficient of the enamel is slightly less, it is lightly compressed
upon cooling, a desirable condition because glass is strong in compression.
    To obtain good adhesion between enamel and metal, one of the so-called tran-
sition elements used in glass formulation must be employed. Cobalt is favored.
Apparently, the transition elements promote growth of iron crystals from base metal
into the enamel, encourage formation of an adherent oxide coating on the iron,
which fuses to the enamel, or develop polar chemical bonds between metal and
glass.
    Usually, white or colored opaque enamels are desired. Opacity is promoted by
mixing in, but not dissolving, finely divided materials possessing refractive indexes
widely different from the glass. Tin oxide, formerly widely used, has been largely
displaced by less expensive and more effective titanium and zirconium compounds.
Clay adds to opacity. Various oxides are included to impart color.
    Most enameling consists of a ground coat and one or two cover coats fired on
at slightly lower temperatures; but one-coat enameling of somewhat inferior quality
can be accomplished by first treating the iron surface with soluble nickel salts.
    The usual high-soda glasses used to obtain low-temperature softening enamels
are not highly acid-resistant and therefore stain readily and deeply when iron-
containing water drips on them. Enamels highly resistant to severe staining con-
ditions must be considerably harder; i.e., have higher softening temperatures and
therefore require special techniques to avoid warping and distorting of the metal
base.
    Interiors of refrigerators are often made of porcelain-enameled steel sheets for
resistance to staining by spilled foods, whereas the exteriors are commonly baked-
on synthetic-resin finishes.



4.79   PORCELAIN BIBLIOGRAPHY

F. H. Norton, ‘‘Elements of Ceramics,’’ Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Cam-
bridge, Mass.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.97


   W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen, and D. R. Uhlmann, ‘‘Introduction to Ceramics,’’
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
   G. S. Brady and H. R. Clauser, ‘‘Materials Handbook,’’ 13th ed., and J. H.
Callender, ‘‘Time-Saver Standards for Architectural Design Data,’’ McGraw-Hill
Publishing Company, New York.



ASPHALT AND BITUMINOUS PRODUCTS

Asphalt, because of its water-resistant qualities and good durability, is used for
many building applications to exclude water, provide a cushion against vibration
and expansion, and serve as pavement.



4.80   ASPHALTS FOR DAMPPROOFING AND
       WATERPROOFING

Dampproofing is generally only a mopped-on coating, whereas waterproofing usu-
ally is a built-up coating of one or more plies. Bituminous systems used for damp-
proofing and waterproofing may be hot applied or cold applied.
    ASTM D449, ‘‘Asphalt Used in Dampproofing and Waterproofing,’’ specifies
three types of asphalt. Type I, a soft, adhesive, easy-flowing, self-healing bitumen,
is intended for use for underground construction, such as foundations, or where
similar moderate temperature conditions exist. The softening point of Type I may
range from 115 to 140⬚F. Type II may be used above ground; for example, on
retaining walls or where temperatures will not exceed 122⬚F. The softening point
of Type II may range from 145 to 170⬚F.
    D449 asphalts are suitable for use with an asphalt primer meeting the require-
ments of ASTM D41. In construction of membrane waterproofing systems with
these asphalts, felts should conform to ASTM D226 or D250, fabrics to D173,
D1327, or D1668, and asphalt-impregnated glass mats to D2178.
    For cold-applied systems, asphalt emulsions or cut-back asphalt mastic rein-
forced with glass fabric may be used. ASTM D1187 specifies asphalt-based emul-
sions for protective coatings for metal. D491 contains requirements for asphalt
mastic for use in waterproofing building floors but not intended as pavement. The
mastic is a mixture of asphalt cement, mineral filler, and mineral aggregate. D1668
covers glass fabric for roofing and waterproofing membranes.



4.81   BITUMINOUS ROOFING

Hot asphalt or coal tar are used for conventional built-up roofing. The bitumens are
heated to a high enough temperature to fuse with saturant bitumen in roofing felts,
thus welding the plies together. The optimum temperature at the point of application
for achieving complete fusion, optimum mopping properties, and the desirable in-
terply mopping weight is called the equiviscous temperature (EVT). Information
on EVT should be obtained from the manufacturer.
4.98                                 SECTION FOUR


4.81.1   Built-Up Roofing

For constructing built-up roofing, four grades of asphalt are recognized (ASTM
D312): Type I, for inclines up to 1⁄2 in / ft; Type II, for inclines up to 11⁄2 in / ft;
Type III, for inclines up to 3 in / ft; and Type IV, suited for inclines up to 6 in / ft,
generally in areas with relatively high year-round temperatures. Types I through IV
may be either smooth or surfaced with slag or gravel. Softening ranges are 135 to
150⬚F, 158 to 176⬚F, 180 to 200⬚F and 210 to 225⬚F, respectively. Heating of the
asphalts should not exceed the flash point, the finished blowing temperature, or
475⬚F for Type I, 500⬚F for Type II, 525⬚F for Types III and IV.
   Coal-tar pitches for roofing, dampproofing, and waterproofing are of three types
(ASTM D450): Type I, for built-up roofing systems; Type II, for dampproofing and
membranes waterproofing systems; Type III, for built-up roofing, but containing
less volatiles than Type I. Softening ranges are 126 to 140⬚F, 106 to 126⬚F, and
133 to 147⬚F, respectively.


4.81.2   Roofing Felts

For built-up waterproofing and roofing, types of membranes employed include felt
(ASTM D226, D227) and cotton fabrics (ASTM D173). Felts are felted sheets of
inorganic or organic fibers saturated with asphalt or coal tar conforming to ASTM
D312 and D450.
   Standard asphalt felts weigh 15, 20, or 30 lb per square (100 ft2), and standard
coal-tar felts weigh 13 lb per square.
   Cotton fabrics are open-weave materials weighing at least 31⁄2 oz / yd2 before
saturation, with thread counts of 24 to 32 per inch. The saturants are either asphalts
or coal tars. The saturated fabrics must weigh at least 10 oz / yd2.


4.81.3   Roll Roofing

Asphalt roll roofing, shingles, and siding consist basically of roofing felt, first uni-
formly impregnated with hot asphaltic saturant and then coated on each side with
at least one layer of a hot asphaltic coating and compounded with a water-insoluble
mineral filler. The bottom or reverse side, in each instance, is covered with some
suitable material, like powdered mica, to prevent sticking in the package or roll.
    Granule-surfaced roll roofing (ASTM D249) is covered uniformly on the weather
side with crushed mineral granules, such as slate. Minimum weight of the finished
roofing should be 81 to 83 lb per square (100 ft2), and the granular coating should
weigh at least 18.5 lb per square.
    Roll roofing (ASTM 224), surfaced with powdered talc or mica, is made in two
grades, 39.8 and 54.6 lb per square, of which at least 18 lb must be the surfacing
material.


4.82     ASPHALT SHINGLES

There are three standard types: Type I, uniform or nonuniform thickness; Type II,
thick butt; and Type III, uniform or nonuniform thickness (ASTM D225). Average
                               BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.99


weights must be 95 lb per square (100 ft2). For types I and III, the weather-side
coating must weigh 23.0 lb per square; for Type II, 30.0 lb per square. The material
in these shingles is similar to that in granule-surfaced roll roofing.


4.83   ASPHALT MASTICS AND GROUTS

Asphalt mastics used for waterproofing floors and similar structures, but not in-
tended for pavement, consist of mixtures of asphalt cement, mineral filler, and
mineral aggregate, which can be heated at about 400⬚F to a sufficiently soft con-
dition to be poured and troweled into place. The raw ingredients may be mixed on
the job or may be premixed, formed into cakes, and merely heated on the job
(ASTM D491).
    Bituminous grouts are suitable for waterproofing above or below ground level
as protective coatings. They also can be used for membrane waterproofing or for
bedding and filling the joints of brickwork. Either asphaltic or coal-tar pitch ma-
terials of dampproofing and waterproofing grade are used, together with mineral
aggregates as coarse as sand.


4.84   BITUMINOUS PAVEMENTS

Asphalts for pavement (ASTM D946) contain petroleum asphalt cement, derived
by the distillation of asphaltic petroleum. Various grades are designated as 40–50,
60–70, 85–100, 120–150, and 200–300, depending upon the depth of penetration
of a standard needle in a standard test (ASTM D5).
   Emulsions range from low to high viscosity and quick- to slow-setting (ASTM
D977).


4.85   ASPHALT BIBLIOGRAPHY

‘‘The NRCA Roofing and Waterproofing Manual,’’ National Roofing Contractors
Association, Rosemont, IL 60018-5607.


JOINT SEALS

Calking compounds, sealants, and gaskets are employed to seal the points of contact
between similar and dissimilar building materials that cannot otherwise be made
completely tight. Such points include glazing, the joints between windows and
walls, the many joints occurring in the increasing use of panelized construction,
the copings of parapets, and similar spots.
   The requirements of a good joint seal are: (1) good adhesion to or tight contact
with the surrounding materials, (2) good cohesive strength, (3) elasticity to allow
for compression and extension as surrounding materials retract or approach each
4.100                              SECTION FOUR


other because of changes in moisture content or temperature, (4) good durability
or the ability to maintain their properties over a long-period of time without marked
deterioration, and (5) no staining of surrounding materials such as stone.


4.86    CALKING COMPOUNDS

These sealers are used mostly with traditional materials such as masonry, with
relatively small windows, and at other points where motion of building components
is relatively small. They are typically composed of elastomeric polymers or bodied
linseed or soy oil, or both, combined with calcium carbonate (ground marble or
limestone), tinting pigments, a gelling agent, drier, and mineral spirits (thinners).
    Two types of commonly employed, gun grade and knife grade. Gun grades are
viscous semiliquids suitable for application by hand or air-operated calking guns.
Knife grades are stiffer and are applied by knife, spatula, or mason’s pointing tools.
    Because calking compounds are based on drying oils that eventually harden in
contact with the air, the best joints are generally thick and deep, with a relatively
small portion exposed to the air. The exposed surface is expected to form a tough
protective skin for the soft mass underneath, which in turn provides the cohesive-
ness, adhesiveness, and elasticity required. Thin shallow beads cannot be expected
to have the durability of thick joints with small exposed surface areas.


4.87    SEALANTS

For joints and other points where large movements of building components are
expected, elastomeric materials may be used as sealants. Whereas traditional calk-
ing compounds should not be used where movements of more than 5% of joint
width or at most 10% are expected, larger movements, typically 10 to 25%, can be
accommodated by the rubbery sealants.
   Some elastomeric sealants consist of two components, mixed just before appli-
cation. Polymerization occurs, leading to conversion of the viscous material to a
rubbery consistency. The working time or pot life before this occurs varies, de-
pending upon formulation and temperature, from a fraction of an hour to several
hours or a day. Other formulations are single-component and require no mixing.
They harden upon exposure to moisture in the air.
   Various curing agents, accelerators, plasticizers, fillers, thickeners, and other
agents may be added, depending on the basic material and the end-use requirements.
   Among the polymeric materials employed are:
   Acrylics: solvent-release type, water-release type, latex
   Butyls: skinning and nonskinning
   Polysulfide: two-part and one-part
   Silicone: one-part
   Polyurethane: two-part and one-part
   Chlorosulfonated polyethylene: one-part
   Polyurethane-polyepoxide: two-part
                                 BUILDING MATERIALS                               4.101


   Characteristics of the preceding formulations vary. Hence, the proper choice of
materials depends upon the application. A sealant with the appropriate hardness,
extensibility, useful temperature ranges, expected life, dirt pickup, staining, color-
ability, rate of cure to tack-free condition, toxicity, resistance to ultraviolet light,
and other attributes should be chosen for the specific end use.
   In many joints, such as those between building panels, it is necessary to provide
backup; that is, a foundation against which the compound can be applied. This
serves to limit the thickness of the joint, to provide the proper ratio of thickness to
width, and to force the compound into intimate contact with the substrate, thereby
promoting adhesion. For the purpose, any of various compressible materials, such
as polyethylene or polyurethane rope, or oakum, may be employed.
   To promote adhesion to the substrate, various primers may be needed. (To pre-
vent adhesion of the compound to parts of the substrate where adhesion is not
wanted, any of various liquid and tape bond-breakers may be employed.) Generally,
good adhesion requires dry, clean surfaces free of grease and other deleterious
materials.



4.88   GASKETS

Joint seals described in Arts. 4.86 and 4.87 are formed in place; that is, soft masses
are put into the joints and conform to their geometry. A gasket, on the other hand,
is preformed and placed into a joint whose geometry must conform with the gasket
in such a way as to seal the joint by compression of the gasket. Gaskets, however,
are cured under shop-controlled conditions, whereas sealants cure under variable
and not always favorable field conditions.
    Rubbery materials most commonly employed for gaskets are cellular or non-
cellular (dense) neoprene, EPDM (ethylene-propylene polymers and terpolymers),
and polyvinylchloride polymers.
    Gaskets are generally compression types or lock-strip (zipper) types. The former
are forced into the joint and remain tight by being kept under compression. With
lock-strip gaskets, a groove in the gasket permits a lip to be opened and admit glass
or other panel, after which a strip is forced into the groove, tightening the gasket
in place. If the strip is separable from the gasket, its composition is often harder
than the gasket itself.
    For setting large sheets of glass and similar units, setting or supporting spacer
blocks of rubber are often combined with gaskets of materials such as vulcanized
synthetic rubber and are finally sealed with the elastomeric rubber-based sealants
or glazing compounds.



4.89   JOINT SEALS BIBLIOGRAPHY

‘‘Building Seals and Sealants,’’ STP 606, ASTM, Philadelphia, Pa.
   J. P. Cook, ‘‘Construction Sealants and Adhesives,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York.
   A. Damusis, ‘‘Sealants,’’ Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, New York.
4.102                               SECTION FOUR


PAINTS AND OTHER COATINGS

Protective and decorative coatings generally employed in building are the following:

Oil Paint. Drying-oil vehicles or binders plus opaque and extender pigments.

Water Paint. Pigments plus vehicles based on water, casein, protein, oil emul-
sions, and rubber or resin latexes, separately or in combination.

Calcimine. Water and glue, with or without casein, plus powdered calcium car-
bonate and any desired colored pigments.

Varnish. Transparent combination of drying oil and natural or synthetic resins.

Enamel. Varnish vehicle plus pigments.

Lacquer. Synthetic-resin film former, usually nitrocellulose, plus plasticizers, vol-
atile solvents, and other resins.

Shellac. Exudations of the lac insect, dissolved in alcohol.

Japan. Solutions of metallic salts in drying oils, or varnishes containing asphalt
and opaque pigments.

Aluminum Paint. Fine metallic aluminum flakes suspended in drying oil plus
resin, or in nitrocellulose.



4.90    VEHICLES OR BINDERS

Following are descriptions of the most commonly used vehicles and binders for
paint:

Natural Drying Oils. Drying oils harden by absorbing oxygen. The most impor-
tant natural oils are linseed from flax seed (for many years the standard paint
vehicle), tung oil (faster drying, good compatibility with varnish), oiticica oil (sim-
ilar to tung), safflower (best nonyellowing oil), soybean (flexible films), dehydrated
caster (good adhesion, fast drying), and fish oil (considered inferior but cheap).

Alkyds. These, the most widely used paint vehicles, are synthetic resins that are
modified with various vegetable oils to produce clear resins that are harder than
natural oils. Properties of the film depend on relative proportions of oil and resin.
The film is both air drying and heat hardening.

Latexes. Latex paints are based on emulsions of various polymers including acryl-
ics, polyvinyl acetate, styrene-butadiene, polyvinyl chloride, and rubber. They are
easy to apply, dry quickly, have no solvent odor, and application tools are easily
cleaned with soap and water. The films adhere well to various surfaces, have good
color retention, and have varying degrees of flexibility.
                                BUILDING MATERIALS                              4.103


Epoxy and Epoxy-Polyester. Catalyzed two-part, all-epoxy coatings are formed
by addition of a catalyst to the liquid epoxy just before application (pot life a few
minutes to a day). Films are as hard as many baked-on coatings and are resistant
to solvents and traffic. Oil-modified epoxy esters, in contrast, harden on oxidation
without a catalyst. They are less hard and chemically resistant than catalyzed ep-
oxies, but dry fast and are easily applied. Epoxy-polyesters mixed just before use
produce smooth finishes suitable for many interior surfaces and are chemically
resistant.

Polyurethanes. These produce especially abrasion-treatment, fast-hardening coat-
ings. Two-component formulations, of variable pot life, are mixed just before use.
One-component formulations cure by evaporation and reaction with moisture in air
(30 to 90% relative humidity). Oils and alkyds may be added.

Vinyl Solutions. Solutions of polyvinyl chloride and vinyl esters dry rapidly and
are built up by successive, sprayed thin coatings. They characteristically have low
gloss, high flexibility, and inertness to water but are sensitive to some solvents.
Adhesion may be a problem. Weather resistance is excellent.

Dryers. These are catalysts that hasten the hardening of drying oils. Most dryers
are salts of heavy metals, especially cobalt, manganese, and lead, to which salts of
zinc and calcium may be added. Iron salts, usable only in dark coatings, accelerate
hardening at high temperatures. Dryers are normally added to paints to hasten
hardening, but they must not be used too liberally or they cause rapid deterioration
of the oil by overoxidation.

Thinners. These are volatile constituents added to coatings to promote their
spreading qualities by reducing viscosity. They should not react with the other
constituents and should evaporate completely. Commonly used thinners are turpen-
tine and mineral spirits, i.e., derivatives of petroleum and coal tar.



4.91   PIGMENTS FOR PAINTS

Pigments may be classified as white and colored, or as opaque and extender pig-
ments. The hiding power of pigments depends on the difference in index of refrac-
tion of the pigment and the surrounding medium—usually the vehicle of a protec-
tive coating. In opaque pigments, these indexes are markedly different from those
of the vehicles (oil or other); in extender pigments, they are nearly the same. The
comparative hiding efficiencies of various pigments must be evaluated on the basis
of hiding power per pound and cost per pound.
    Principal white pigments, in descending order of relative hiding power per
pound, are approximately as follows: rutile titanium dioxide, anatase titanium di-
oxide, zinc sulfide, titanium-calcium, titanium-barium, zinc sulfide-barium, titanated
lithopone, lithopone, antimony oxide, zinc oxide.
    Zinc oxide is widely used by itself or in combination with other pigments. Its
color is unaffected by many industrial and chemical atmospheres. It imparts gloss
and reduces chalking but tends to crack and alligator instead.
    Zinc sulfide is a highly opaque pigment widely used in combination with other
pigments.
4.104                              SECTION FOUR


    Titanium dioxide and extended titanium pigments have high opacity and gen-
erally excellent properties. Various forms of the pigments have different properties.
For example, anatase titanium dioxide promotes chalking, whereas rutile inhibits
it.
    Colored pigments for building use are largely inorganic materials, especially
for outdoor use, where the brilliant but fugitive organic pigments soon fade. The
principal inorganic colored pigments are:

   Metallic. Aluminum flake or ground particle, copper bronze, gold leaf, zinc dust
   Black. Carbon black, lampblack, graphite, vegetable black, and animal blacks
   Earth colors. Yellow ocher, raw and burnt umber, raw and burnt sienna; reds
   and maroons
   Blue. Ultramarine, iron ferrocyanide (Prussian, Chinese, Milori)
   Brown. Mixed ferrous and ferric oxide
   Green. Chromium oxide, hydrated chromium oxide, chrome greens
   Orange. Molybdated chrome orange
   Red. Iron oxide, cadmium red, vermilion
   Yellow. Zinc chromate, cadmium yellows, hydrated iron oxide

    Extender pigments are added to extend the opaque pigments, increase durabil-
ity, provide better spreading characteristics, and reduce cost. The principal extender
pigments are silica, china clay, talc, mica, barium sulfate, calcium sulfate, calcium
carbonate, and such materials as magnesium oxide, magnesium carbonate, barium
carbonate, and others used for specific purposes.



4.92    RESINS FOR PAINTS

Natural and synthetic resins are used in a large variety of air-drying and baked
finishes. The natural resins include both fossil resins, which are harder and usually
superior in quality, and recent resins tapped from a variety of resin-exuding trees.
The most important fossil resins are amber (semiprecious jewelry), Kauri, Congo,
Boea Manila, and Pontianak. Recent resins include Damar, East India, Batu, Manila,
and rosin. Shellac, the product of the lac insect, may be considered to be in this
class of resins.
    The synthetic resins, in addition to the ones discussed in Art. 4.90, are used for
applications requiring maximum durability. Among them are phenol formaldehyde,
melamine formaldehyde, urea formaldehyde, silicones, fluorocarbons, and cellulose
acetate-butyrate.
    Phenolics in varnishes are used for outdoor and other severe applications on
wood and metals. They are especially durable when baked.
    Melamine and urea find their way into a large variety of industrial finishes, such
as automobile and refrigerator finishes.
    Silicones are used when higher temperatures are encountered that can be borne
by the other finishes.
    Fluorocarbons are costly but provide high-performance coatings, industrial sid-
ing, and curtain walls with excellent gloss retention, stain resistance, and weather
resistance. Cellulose acetate-butyrate provides shop-applied, high-gloss finishes.
                              BUILDING MATERIALS                           4.105


4.93   COATINGS BIBLIOGRAPHY

A. Banov, ‘‘Paints and Coatings Handbook.’’ Structures Publishing Company, Far-
mington, Mich.
   R. M. Burns and W. Bradley, ‘‘Protective Coatings for Metals,’’ Van Nostrand
Reinhold Company, New York.
   C. R. Martens, ‘‘The Technology of Paints, Varnishes and Lacquers,’’ Van Nos-
trand Reinhold Company, New York.
   W. C. Golton, ‘‘Analysis of Paints and Related Materials: Current Techniques
for Solving Coatings Problems,’’ STP 1119, ASTM, Philadelphia, Pa.
                        SECTION FIVE
            STRUCTURAL THEORY
           Akbar Tamboli, Michael Xing, Mohsin Ahmed
                Thornton-Tomasetti Engineers, Newark, New Jersey




STRUCTURAL THEORY CREATES IDEALIZATION
OF STRUCTURE FOR PURPOSES OF ANALYSIS

Structural modeling is an essential and important tool in structural engineering.
Over the past 200 years, many of the most significant contributions to the under-
standing of the structures have been made by Scientist Engineers while working on
mathematical models, which were used for real structures.
   Application of mathematical model of any sort to any real structural system
must be idealized in some fashion; that is, an analytical model must be developed.
There has never been an analytical model, which is a precise representation of the
physical system. While the performance of the structure is the result of natural
effects, the development and thus the performance of the model is entirely under
the control of the analyst. The validity of the results obtained from applying math-
ematical theory to the study of the model therefore rests on the accuracy of the
model. While this is true, it does not mean that all analytical models must be
elaborate, conceptually sophisticated devices. In some cases very simple models
give surprisingly accurate results. While in some other cases they may yield an-
swers, which deviate markedly from the true physical behavior of the model, yet
be completely satisfactory for the problem at hand.
   Structure design is the application of structural theory to ensure that buildings
and other structures are built to support all loads and resist all constraining forces
that may be reasonably expected to be imposed on them during their expected
service life, without hazard to occupants or users and preferably without dangerous
deformations, excessive sideways (drift), or annoying vibrations. In addition, good
design requires that this objective be achieved economically.
   Provision should be made in application of structural theory to design for ab-
normal as well as normal service conditions. Abnormal conditions may arise as a
result of accidents, fire, explosions, tornadoes, severer-than-anticipated earthquakes,
floods, and inadvertent or even deliberate overloading of building components. Un-
der such conditions, parts of a building may be damaged. The structural system,
however, should be so designed that the damage will be limited in extent and
undamaged portions of the building will remain stable. For the purpose, structural
elements should be proportioned and arranged to form a stable system under normal
                                         5.1
5.2                                 SECTION FIVE


service conditions. In addition, the system should have sufficient continuity and
ductility, or energy-absorption capacity, so that if any small portion of it should
sustain damage, other parts will transfer loads (at least until repairs can be made)
to remaining structural components capable of transmitting the loads to the ground.
    (‘‘Steel Design Handbook, LRFD Method’’, Akbar R. Tamboli Ed., McGraw-
Hill 1997. ‘‘Design Methods for Reducing the Risk of Progressive Collapse in
Buildings’’. NBS Buildings Science Series 98, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, 1997. ‘‘Handbook of Structural Steel Connection Design and Details’’,
Akbar R. Tamboli Ed., McGraw-Hill 1999’’).



5.1     DESIGN LOADS

Loads are the external forces acting on a structure. Stresses are the internal forces
that resist them. Depending on that manner in which the loads are applied, they
tend to deform the structure and its components—tensile forces tend to stretch,
compressive forces to squeeze together, torsional forces to twist, and shearing forces
to slide parts of the structure past each other.


5.1.1   Types of Loads

External loads on a structure may be classified in several different ways. In one
classification, they may be considered as static or dynamic.
   Static loads are forces that are applied slowly and then remain nearly constant.
One example is the weight, or dead load, of a floor or roof system.
   Dynamic loads vary with time. They include repeated and impact loads.
   Repeated loads are forces that are applied a number of times, causing a variation
in the magnitude, and sometimes also in the sense, of the internal forces. A good
example is an off-balance motor.
   Impact loads are forces that require a structure or its components to absorb
energy in a short interval of time. An example is the dropping of a heavy weight
on a floor slab, or the shock wave from an explosion striking the walls and roof of
a building.
   External forces may also be classified as distributed and concentrated.
   Uniformly distributed loads are forces that are, or for practical purposes may
be considered, constant over a surface area of the supporting member. Dead weight
of a rolled-steel I beam is a good example.
   Concentrated loads are forces that have such a small contact area as to be
negligible compared with the entire surface area of the supporting member. A beam
supported on a girder, for example, may be considered, for all practical purposes,
a concentrated load on the girder.
   Another common classification for external forces labels them axial, eccentric,
and torsional.
   An axial load is a force whose resultant passes through the centroid of a section
under consideration and is perpendicular to the plane of the section.
   An eccentric load is a force perpendicular to the plane of the section under
consideration but not passing through the centroid of the section, thus bending the
supporting member (see Arts. 5.4.2, 5.5.17, and 5.5.19).
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.3


    Torsional loads are forces that are offset from the shear center of the section
under consideration and are inclined to or in the plane of the section, thus twisting
the supporting member (see Arts. 5.4.2 and 5.5.19).
    Also, building codes classify loads in accordance with the nature of the source.
For example:
    Dead loads include materials, equipment, constructions, or other elements of
weight supported in, on, or by a building, including its own weight, that are in-
tended to remain permanently in place.
    Live loads include all occupants, materials, equipment, constructions, or other
elements of weight supported in, on, or by a building and that will or are likely to
be moved or relocated during the expected life of the building.
    Impact loads are a fraction of the live loads used to account for additional
stresses and deflections resulting from movement of the live loads.
    Wind loads are maximum forces that may be applied to a building by wind in
a mean recurrence interval, or a set of forces that will produce equivalent stresses.
    Snow loads are maximum forces that may be applied by snow accumulation in
a mean recurrence interval.
    Seismic loads are forces that produce maximum stresses or deformations in a
building during an earthquake.


5.1.2   Service Loads

In designing structural members, designers should use whichever is larger of the
following:

1. Loadings specified in the local or state building code.
2. Probable maximum loads, based not only on current site conditions and original
   usage of proposed building spaces but also on possible future events. Loads that
   are of uncertain magnitude and that may be treated as statistical variables should
   be selected in accordance with a specific probability that the chosen magnitudes
   will not be exceeded during the life of the building or in accordance with the
   corresponding mean recurrence interval. The mean recurrence interval generally
   used for ordinary permanent buildings is 50 years. The interval, however, may
   be set at 25 years for structures with no occupants or offering negligible risk to
   life, or at 100 years for permanent buildings with a high degree of sensitivity
   to the loads and an unusually high degree of hazard to life and property in case
   of failure.

   In the absence of a local or state building code, designers can be guided by
loads specified in a national model building code or by the following data:
   Loads applied to structural members may consist of the following, alone or in
combination: dead, live, impact, earth pressure, hydrostatic pressure, snow, ice, rain,
wind, or earthquake loads; constraining forces, such as those resulting from restric-
tion of thermal, shrinkage, or moisture-change movements; or forces caused by
displacements or deformations of members, such as those caused by creep, plastic
flow, differential settlement, or sideways (drift).

Dead Loads. Actual weights of materials and installed equipment should be used.
See Tables 5.1 and 5.2c.
TABLE 5.1 Minimum Design Dead Loads
Walls                                    lb / ft2   Floor Finishes                                                                          lb / ft2
  Clay brick                                          Asphalt block, 2-in                                                                    24
     High-absorption, per 4-in wythe       34         Cement, 1-in                                                                           12
     Medium-absorption, per 4-in wythe     39         Ceramic or quarry tile, 1-in                                                           12
     Low-absorption, per 4-in wythe        46         Hardwood flooring, 7⁄8-in                                                                4
  Sand-lime brick, per 4-in wythe          38         Plywood subflooring, 1⁄2-in                                                              1.5
  Concrete brick                                      Resilient flooring, such as asphalt tile and linoleum                                    2
     4-in, with heavy aggregate            46         Slate, 1-in                                                                            15
     4-in, with light aggregate            33         Softwood subflooring, per in of thickness                                                3
  Concrete block, hollow                              Terrazzo, 1-in                                                                         13
     8-in, with heavy aggregate            55         Wood block, 3-in                                                                         4
     8-in, with light aggregate            35                                                                          lb / ft2
     12-in, with heavy aggregate           85
     12-in, with light aggregate           55       Wood joists, double wood floor, joist size         12-in spacing              16-in spacing
  Clay tile, loadbearing
                                                                     2   ⫻   6                                  6                       5
     4-in                                  24
                                                                     2   ⫻   8                                  6                       6
     8-in                                  42
                                                                     2   ⫻   10                                 7                       6
     12-in                                 58
                                                                     2   ⫻   12                                 8                       7
  Clay tile, nonloadbearing
                                                                     3   ⫻   6                                  7                       6
     2-in                                  11
                                                                     3   ⫻   8                                  8                       7
     4-in                                  18
                                                                     3   ⫻   10                                 9                       8
     8-in                                  34
                                                                     3   ⫻   12                                11                       9
  Furring tile
                                                                     3   ⫻   14                                12                      10
     11⁄2-in                                8
     2-in                                  10       Concrete Slabs                                                                       lb / ft2
  Glass block, 4-in                        18         Stone aggregate, reinforced, per in of thickness                                    12.5
  Gypsum block, hollow                                Slag, reinforced, per in of thickness                                               11.5
     2-in                                   9.5       Lightweight aggregate, reinforced, per in of thickness                           6 to 10
     4-in                                  12.5
     6-in                                  18.5
5.4
TABLE 5.1 Minimum Design Dead Loads (Continued )

Masonry                                     lb / ft3   Floor Fill                                        lb / ft2
  Cast-stone masonry                        144          Cinders, no cement, per in of thickness               5
  Concrete, stone aggregate, reinforced     150          Cinders, with cement, per in of thickness             9
  Ashlar:                                                Sand, per in of thickness                             8
     Granite                                165        Partitions                                        lb / ft2
     Limestone, crystalline                 165          Plaster on masonry
     Limestone, oölitic                    135             Gypsum, with sand, per in of thickness          8.5
     Marble                                 173             Gypsum, with lightweight aggregate, per in        4
     Sandstone                              144             Cement, with sand, per in of thickness          10
Roof and Wall Coverings                     lb / ft2        Cement, with lightweight aggregate, per in        5
  Clay tile shingles                        9 to 14      Plaster, 2-in solid                                20
  Asphalt shingles                             2         Metal studs
  Composition:                                              Plastered two sides                              18
     3-ply ready roofing                       1            Gypsumboard each side                             6
     4-ply felt and gravel                     5.5       Wood studs, 2 ⫻ 4-in
     5-ply felt and gravel                     6            Unplastered                                        3
  Copper or tin                                1            Plastered one side                               11
  Corrugated steel                             2            Plastered two sides                              19
  Sheathing (gypsum), 1⁄2-in                   2            Gypsumboard each side                              7
  Sheathing (wood), per in thickness           3       Glass                                             lb / ft2
  Slate, 1⁄4-in                              10          Single-strength                                    1.2
  Wood shingles                                2         Double-strength                                    1.6
Waterproofing                               lb / ft2     Plate, 1⁄8-in                                      1.6
  Five-ply membrane                            5       Insulation                                        lb / ft2
Ceilings                                    lb / ft2     Cork, per in of thickness                          1.0
  Plaster (on tile or concrete)                5         Foamed glass, per in of thickness                  0.8
  Suspended metal lath and gypsum plaster    10          Glass-fiber bats, per in of thickness            0.06
  Suspended metal lath and cement plaster    15          Polystyrene, per in of thickness                   0.2
  Suspended steel channel supports             2         Urethane                                         0.17
  Gypsumboard per 1⁄4-in thickness             1.1       Vermiculite, loose fill, per in of thickness       0.5
5.5
5.6                                          SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.2 Minimum Design Live Loads

                    a. Uniformly distributed live loads, lb / ft2, impact includeda
           Occupancy or use                  Load                Occupancy or use                   Load
Assembly spaces:                                       Marques                                       75
  Auditoriumsb with fixed seats                60      Morgue                                       125
  Auditoriumsb with movable seats             100      Office buildings:
  Ballrooms and dance halls                   100        Corridors above first floor                 80
  Bowling alleys, poolrooms,                             Files                                      125
     similar recreational areas                75        Offices                                     50
  Conference and card rooms                    50      Penal institutions:
  Dining rooms, restaurants                   100        Cell blocks                                 40
  Drill rooms                                 150        Corridors                                  100
  Grandstand and reviewing-stand                       Residential:
     seating areas                            100        Dormitories
  Gymnasiums                                  100           Nonpartitioned                              60
  Lobbies, first-floor                        100           Partitioned                                 40
  Roof gardens, terraces                      100        Dwellings, multifamily:
  Skating rinks                               100           Apartments                                  40
  Stadium and arenas bleachers                100           Corridors                                   80
Bakeries                                      150        Hotels:
Balconies (exterior)                          100           Guest rooms, private cooridors           40
  Up to 100 ft2 on one- and two-                            Public corridors                        100
     family houses                             60        Housing, one- and two-family:
Bowling alleys, alleys only                    40           First floor                                 40
Broadcasting studios                          100           Storage attics                              80
Catwalks                                       40           Uninhabitable attics                        20
Corridors:                                                  Upper floors, habitable attics              30
  Areas of public assembly, first-                     Schools:
     floor lobbies                            100        Classrooms                                  40
  Other floors same as occupancy                         Corridors above first floor                 80
     served, except as indicated                         First floor corridors                      100
     elsewhere in this table                             Shops with light equipment                  60
Fire escapes:                                          Stairs and exitways                          100
Single-family dwellings only                   40        Handrails, vertical and horizontal
  Others                                      100           thrust, lb / lin ft                         50
Garages:                                               Storage warehouse:
  Passenger cars                                50       Heavy                                      250
  Trucks and buses                                       Light                                      125
Hospitals:                                             Stores:
  Operating rooms, laboratories,                         Retail:
     service areas                              60          Basement and first floor                100
  Patients’ rooms, wards,                                   Upper floors                             75
     personnel areas                           40        Wholesale                                  125
  Corridors above first floor                  80      Telephone equipment rooms                     80
Kitchens other than domestic                  150      Theaters:
Laboratories, scientific                      100        Aisles, corridors, lobbies                 100
Libraries:                                               Dressing rooms                              40
  Corridors above first floor                   80       Projection rooms                           100
  Reading rooms                                 60       Stage floors                               150
  Stack rooms, books and                               Toilet areas                                  60
     shelving at 65 lb / ft3, but at
     least                                    150
Manufacturing and repair areas:
  Heavy                                       250
  Light                                       125
      a
        See Eqs. (5.1) and (5.2).
      b
        Including churches, schools, theaters, courthouses, and lecture halls.
      c
        Use American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials highway lane loadings.
                                        STRUCTURAL THEORY                                               5.7


TABLE 5.2 Minimum Design Live Loads (Continued )

                                      b. Concentrated live loadsd
                                  Location                                                        Load, lb
                                              2
Elevator machine room grating (on 4-in area)                                                          300
Finish, light floor-plate construction (on 1-in2 area)                                                200
Garages:
  Passenger cars:
     Manual parking (on 20-in2 area)                                                                2,000
     Mechanical parking (no slab), per wheel                                                        1,500
  Trucks, buses (on 20-in2 area), per wheel                                                        16,000
  Manufacturing
     Light                                                                                          2,000
     Heavy                                                                                          3,000
Office floors (on area 2.5 ft square)                                                               2,000
Scuttles, skylight ribs, and accessible ceilings (on area 2.5 ft square)                              200
Sidewalks (on area 2.5 ft square)                                                                   8,000
Stair treads (on 4-in2 area at center of tread)                                                       300
Libraries (on area 2.5 ft square)                                                                   1,500
Hospitals (on area 2.5 ft square)                                                                   1,000
Schools (on area 2.5 ft square)                                                                     1,000
Stores (on area 2.5 ft square)                                                                      3,000
    d
      Use instead of uniformly distributed live load, except for roof trusses, if concentrated loads produce
greater stresses or deflections. Add impact factor for machinery and moving loads: 100% for elevators, 20%
for light machines, 50% for reciprocating machines, 33% for floor or balcony hangers. For craneways, and
a vertical force equal to 25% of maximum wheel load; a lateral force equal to 10% of the weight of trolley
and lifted load, at the top of each rail; and a longitudinal force equal to 10% of maximum wheel loads,
acting at top of rail.




Live Loads. These may be concentrated or distributed loads and should be con-
sidered placed on the building to produce maximum effects on the structural mem-
ber being designed. Minimum live loads to be used in building design are listed in
Table 5.2. These include an allowance for impact, except as noted in the footnote
of Table 5.2b.
   Partitions generally are considered to be live loads, because they may be installed
at any time, almost anywhere, to subdivide interior spaces, or may be shifted from
original places to other places in the future. Consequently, unless a floor is designed
for a large live load, for example, 80 lb / ft2, the weight of partitions should be
added to other live loads, whether or not partitions are shown on the working
drawings for building construction.
   Because of the low probability that a large floor area contributing load to a
specific structural member will be completely loaded with maximum design live
loads, building codes generally permit these loads to be reduced for certain types
of occupancy. Usually, however, codes do not permit any reduction for places of
public assembly, dwellings, garages for trucks and buses, or one-way slabs. For
areas with a minimum required live load exceeding 100 lb / ft2 and for passenger-
car garages, live loads on columns supporting more than one floor may be decreased
20%. Except for the preceding cases, a reduced live load L, lb / ft2, may be computed
from
5.8                                     SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.2 Minimum Design Live Loads (Continued )

                           c. Minimum design loads for materials
                                        Load,                                      Load,
             Material                   lb / ft3                Material           lb / ft3
Aluminum, cast                            165      Gravel, dry                     104
Bituminous products:                               Gypspum, loose                   70
  Asphalt                                  81      Ice                              57.2
  Petroleum, gasoline                      42      Iron, cast                      450
  Pitch                                    69      Lead                            710
  Tar                                      75      Lime, hydrated, loose            32
Brass, cast                               534      Lime, hydrated, compacted        45
Bronze, 8 to 14% tin                      509      Magnesium alloys                112
Cement, portland, loose                    90      Mortar, hardened;
Cement, portland, set                     183         Cement                       130
Cinders, dry, in bulk                      45         Lime                         110
Coal, anthracite, piled                    52      Riprap (not submerged):
Coal, bituminous or lignite, piled         47         Limestone                     83
Coal, peat, dry, piled                     23         Sandstone                     90
Charcoal                                   12      Sand, clean and dry              90
Copper                                    556      Sand, river, dry                106
Earth (not submerged):                             Silver                          656
  Clay, dry                               63       Steel                           490
  Clay, damp                             110       Stone, ashlar:
  Clay and gravel, dry                   100          Basalt, granite, gneiss      165
  Silt, moist, loose                      78          Limestone, marble, quartz    160
  Silt, moist, packed                     96          Sandstone                    140
  Sand and gravel, dry, loose            100          Shale, slate                 155
  Sand and gravel, dry, packed           110       Tin, cast                       459
  Sand and gravel, wet                   120       Water, fresh                     62.4
Gold, solid                             1205       Water, sea                       64




                                        冉
                                     L ⫽ 0.25 ⫹
                                                    15
                                                    兹AI
                                                        冊
                                                        Lo                         (5.1)

where Lo ⫽ unreduced live load, lb / ft2 (see Table 5.1a)
      AI ⫽ influence area, or floor area over which the influence surface for struc-
           tural effects is significantly different from zero
         ⫽ area of four surrounding bays for an interior column, plus similar area
           from supported floors above, if any
         ⫽ area of two adjoining bays for an interior girder or for an edge column,
           plus similar areas from supported floors above, if any
         ⫽ area of one bay for an edge girder or for a corner column, plus similar
           areas from supported floors above, if any
The reduced live load L, however, should not be less than 0.5Lo for members
supporting one floor or 0.4Lo for members supporting two or ore floors.
     Roofs used for promenades should be designed for a minimum life load of 60
lb / ft2, and those used for gardens or assembly, for 100 lb / ft2. Ordinary roofs should
be designed for a minimum live load L, lb / ft2, computed from
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.9


                                   L ⫽ 20R1R2 ⱖ 12                                 (5.2)
where R1   ⫽   1.2 ⫺ 0.001At but not less than 0.6 or more than 1.0
      At   ⫽   tributary area, ft2, for structural member being designed
      R2   ⫽   1.2 ⫺ 0.05r but not less than 0.6 or more than 1.0
       r   ⫽   rise of roof in 12 in for a pitched roof or 32 times the ratio of rise to
               span for an arch or dome
This minimum live load need not be combined with snow load for design of a roof
but should be designed for the larger of the two.

Subgrade Pressures. Walls below grade should be designed for lateral soil pres-
sures and the hydrostatic pressure of subgrade water, plus the load from surcharges
at ground level. Design pressures should take into account the reduced weight of
soil because of buoyancy when water is present. In design of floors at or below
grade, uplift due to hydrostatic pressures on the underside should be considered.

Wind Loads. Horizontal pressures produced by wind are assumed to act normal
to the faces of buildings for design purposes and may be directed toward the interior
of the buildings or outward (Arts. 3.2.1 and 3.2.2). These forces are called velocity
pressures because they are primarily a function of the velocity of the wind striking
the buildings. Building codes usually permit wind pressures to be either calculated
or determined by tests on models of buildings and terrain if the tests meet specified
requirements (see Art. 3.2.2). Codes also specify procedures for calculating wind
loads, such as the following:
    Velocity pressures due to wind to be used in building design vary with type of
terrain, distance above ground level, importance of building, likelihood of hurri-
canes, and basic wind speed recorded near the building site. The wind pressures
are assumed to act normal to the building facades.
    The basic wind speed used in design is the fastest-mile wind speed recorded at
a height of 10 m (32.8 ft) above open, level terrain with a 50-year mean recurrence
interval.
    Unusual wind conditions often occur over rough terrain and around ocean prom-
ontories. Basic wind speeds applicable to such regions should be selected with the
aid of meteorologists and the application of extreme-value statistical analysis to
anemometer readings taken at or near the site of the proposed building. Generally,
however, minimum basic wind velocities are specified in local building codes and
in national model building codes but should be used with discretion, because actual
velocities at a specific sites and on a specific building may be significantly larger.
In the absence of code specifications and reliable data, basic wind speed at a height
of 10 m above grade may be approximated for preliminary design from the follow-
ing:
Coastal areas, northwestern and southeastern
  United States and mountainous area        110 mph
Northern and central United States           90 mph
Other parts of the contiguous states         80 mph
   For design purposes, wind pressures should be determined in accordance with
the degree to which terrain surrounding the proposed building exposes it to the
wind. Exposures may be classified as follows:
5.10                                SECTION FIVE


   Exposure A applies to centers of large cities, where for at least one-half mile
upwind from the building the majority of structures are over 70 ft high and lower
buildings extend at least one more mile upwind.
   Exposure B applies to wooded or suburban terrain or to urban areas with closely
spaced buildings mostly less than 70 ft high, where such conditions prevail upwind
for a distance from the building of at least 1500 ft or 10 times the building height.
   Exposure C exists for flat, open country or exposed terrain with obstructions
less than 30 ft high.
   Exposure D applies to flat unobstructed areas exposed to wind blowing over a
large expanse of water with a shoreline at a distance from the building or not more
than 1500 ft or 10 times the building height.
   For design purposes also, the following formulas may be used to determine, for
heights z (in feet) greater than 15 ft above ground, a pressure coefficient K for
converting wind speeds to pressures.
   For Exposure A, for heights up to 1500 ft above ground level,

                             K ⫽ 0.000517    冉 冊z
                                               32.8
                                                      2/3

                                                                                 (5.3)

For z less than 15 ft, K ⫽ 0.00031.
   For Exposure B, for heights up to 1200 ft above ground level,

                              K ⫽ 0.00133    冉 冊
                                               z
                                              32.8
                                                      4/9

                                                                                 (5.4)

For z less than 15 ft, K ⫽ 0.00095.
   For Exposure C, for heights up to 900 ft above ground level,

                              K ⫽ 0.00256    冉 冊
                                               z
                                              32.8
                                                      2/7

                                                                                 (5.5)

For z less than 15 ft, K ⫽ 0.0020.
   For Exposure D, for heights up to 700 ft above ground level,

                              K ⫽ 0.00357    冉 冊
                                               z
                                              32.8
                                                      1/5

                                                                                 (5.6)

For z less than 15 ft, K ⫽ 0.0031.
   For ordinary buildings not subject to hurricanes, the velocity pressure qz, psf, at
height z may be calculated from
                                      qz ⫽ KV 2                                  (5.7)
where V ⫽ basic wind speed, mi / hr, but not less than 70 mi / hr.
   For important buildings, such as hospitals and communication buildings, for
buildings sensitive to wind, such as slender skyscrapers, and for buildings present-
ing a high degree of hazard to life and property, such as auditoriums, qz computed
from Eq. (5.7) should be increased 15%.
   To allow for hurricanes, qz should be increased 10% for ordinary buildings and
20% for important, wind-sensitive or high-risk buildings along coastlines. These
increases may be assumed to reduce uniformly with distance from the shore to zero
for ordinary buildings and 15% for the more important or sensitive buildings at
points 100 mi inland.
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.11


   Wind pressures on low buildings are different at a specific elevation from those
on tall buildings. Hence, building codes may give different formulas for pressures
for the two types of construction. In any case, however, design wind pressure should
be a minimum of 10 psf.

Multistory Buildings. For design of the main wind-force resisting system of or-
dinary, rectangular, multistory buildings, the design pressure at any height z, ft,
above ground may be computed from
                                     pzw ⫽ GoCpw qz                             (5.8)
where pzw   ⫽   design wind pressure, psf, on windward wall
      Go    ⫽   gust response factor
     Cpw    ⫽   external pressure coefficient
       qz   ⫽   velocity pressure computed from Eq. (5.7) and modified for hurricanes
                and building importance, risks, and wind sensitivity
For windward walls, Cpw may be taken as 0.8. For side walls, Cpw may be assumed
as ⫺0.7 (suction). For roofs and leeward walls, the design pressure at elevation z
is
                                      pzl ⫽ GoCpqh                              (5.9)
where pzl ⫽ design pressure, psf, on roof or leeward wall
      Cp ⫽ external pressure coefficient for roof or leeward wall
      qh ⫽ velocity pressure at mean roof height h (see Fig. 3.1d )
   In these equations, the gust response factor may be taken approximately as
                                                8.58D
                               Go ⫽ 0.65 ⫹               ⱖ1                    (5.10)
                                               (h / 30)n
where D ⫽ 0.16 for Exposure A, 0.10 for Exposure B, 0.07 for Exposure C, and
          0.05 for Exposure D
      n ⫽ 1⁄3 for Exposure A, 2⁄9 for Exposure B, 1⁄7 for Exposure C, and 0.1 for
          Exposure D
      h ⫽ mean roof height, ft
   For leeward walls, subjected to suction, Cp depends on the ratio of the depth d
to width b of the building and may be assumed as follows:
                           d / b ⫽ 1 or less    2    4 or more
                            Cp ⫽ ⫺0.5          ⫺0.3 ⫺0.2

The negative sign indicates suction. Table 5.3 lists values of Cp for pressures on
roofs.

Flexible Buildings. These are structures with a fundamental natural frequency
less than 1 Hz or with a ratio of height to least horizontal dimension (measured at
mid-height for buildings with tapers or setbacks) exceeding 5. For such buildings,
the main wind-force resisting system should be designed for a pressure on wind-
ward walls at any height z, ft, above ground computed from
5.12                                            SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.3 External Pressure Coefficients Cp for Roofs*

Flat roofs                                                                                             ⫺0.7
Wind parallel to ridge of sloping roof
  h / b or h / d ⱕ 2.5                                                                                 ⫺0.7
  h / b or h /. d ⬎ 2.5                                                                                ⫺0.8
Wind perpendicular to ridge of sloping roof, at angle ␪ with horizontal
  Leeward side                                                                                         ⫺0.7
  Windward side
                                                      Slope of roof ␪, deg
    h/s                 10             20             30             40            50          60 or more
0.3 or less             0.2              0.2           0.3           0.4           0.5
0.5                   ⫺0.9           ⫺0.75           ⫺0.2            0.3           0.5             0.01␪
1.0                   ⫺0.9           ⫺0.75           ⫺0.2            0.3           0.5
1.5 or more           ⫺0.9            ⫺0.9           ⫺0.9           0.35          0.21
    * h ⫽ height of building, ft: d ⫽ depth, ft, of building in direction of wind: b ⫽ width, ft, of building
transverse to wind.
    Based on data in ANSI A58.1-1981.



                                               pzw ⫽ Gƒ Cpw qz                                       (5.11)
where Gƒ ⫽ gust response factor determined by analysis of the system taking into
account its dynamic properties. For leeward walls of flexible buildings,
                                               pzl ⫽ Gƒ Cpqh                                         (5.12)
Requiring a knowledge of the fundamental frequency, structural damping charac-
teristics, and type of exposure of the building, the formula for Gƒ is complicated,
but computations may be simplified somewhat by use of tables and charts in the
ASCE 7-98 standard.

One-Story Buildings. For design of the main wind-force resisting system of rec-
tangular, one-story buildings, the design pressure at any height z, ft, above ground
may be computed for windward walls from
                                        pzw ⫽ (GoCp ⫹ CpI)qz                                         (5.13)
where Cp1 ⫽ 0.75 is the percentage of openings in one wall exceeds that of other
            walls by 10% or more
          ⫽ 0.25 for all other cases
For roofs and leeward walls, the design pressure at elevation z is
                                        pzl ⫽ GoCpqh ⫺ Cp2qz                                         (5.14)
where Cp2 ⫽ ⫹0.75 or ⫺0.25 if the percentage of openings in one wall exceeds
            that of other walls by 10% or more
          ⫽ 0.25 for all other cases
(Positive signs indicate pressures acting toward a wall; negative signs indicate pres-
sures acting away from the wall.)
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.13


   In ASCE-7-95 and 98, the basic wind speed changed from fast mile wind to 3-
second gust wind speed in miles per hour. The wind speed values on the basic
wind speed map has changed. This change should not have any big impact on the
wind pressure. However, confusion is easily created because all the major building
codes including the IBC 2000 are still using old basic wind speed map based on
fast mile wind, and they repeatedly refer to ASCE-7 95 or 98. It is to be noted that
the reference from the building codes to the ASCE-7 are either adoption of ASCE-
7 as an alternative approach or for certain factors that are not related to the basic
wind pressure.
   In ASCE-7-95 and 98, new factors such as wind directionality factor, topo-
graphic factor were introduced, and gust effect factors were updated for rigid struc-
tures as well as for flexible / dynamically sensitive structures. The calculation be-
came much more complicated than the approach in this book and the results should
be more accurate. We suggest that for complicated structures it is necessary to use
ASCE-7-98 method to check the results.

Snow, Ice, and Rain Loads. These, in effect, are nonuniformly distributed, ver-
tical, live loads that are imposed by nature and hence are generally uncertain in
magnitude and duration. They may occur alone or in combination. Design snow
loads preferably should be determined for the site of the proposed building with
the advice of meteorologists and application of extreme-value statistical analysis to
rain and snow records for the locality.
    Rain loads depend on drainage and may become large enough to cause roof
failure when drainage is blocked (see Art. 3.4.3).
    Ice loads are created when snow melts, then freezes, or when rain follows a
snow storm and freezes. These loads should be considered in determining the design
snow load. Snow loads may consist of pure snow or a mixture of snow, ice, and
water.
    Design snow loads on roofs may be assumed to be proportional to the maximum
ground snow load pg, lb / ft2, measured in the vicinity of the building with a 50-
year mean recurrence interval. Determination of the constant of proportionality
should take into account:
1. Appropriate mean recurrence interval.
2. Roof exposure. Wind may blow snow off the roof or onto the roof from nearby
   higher roofs or create nonuniform distribution of snow.
3. Roof thermal conditions. Heat escaping through the roof melts the snow. If the
   water can drain off, the snow load decreases. Also, for sloped roofs, if they are
   warm, there is a tendency for snow to slide off. Insulated roofs, however, restrict
   heat loss from the interior and therefore are subjected to larger snow loads.
4. Type of occupancy and uses of building. More conservative loading should be
   used for public-assembly buildings, because of the risk of great loss of life and
   injury to occupants if overloads should cause the roof to collapse.
5. Roof slope. The steeper a roof, the greater is the likelihood of good drainage
   and that show will slide off.
   In addition, roof design should take into account not only the design snow load
uniformly distributed over the whole roof area but also possible unbalanced loading.
Snow may be blown off part of the roof, and snow drifts may pile up over a portion
of the roof.
5.14                                  SECTION FIVE


  For flat roofs, in the absence of building-code requirements, the basic snow load
when the ground snow load pg is 20 lb / ft2 or less may be taken as
                                          Pmin ⫽ pg                              (5.15)
When pg is between 20 and 25 lb / ft2, the minimum allowable design load is pmin ⫽
20 lb / ft2, and when pg exceeds 25 lb / ft2, the basic snow load may be taken as
                                      pƒ ⫽ 0.8pg                                 (5.16)
where pƒ ⫽ design snow load, lb / ft , for a flat roof that may have unheated space
                                      2

           underneath and that may be located where the wind cannot be relied
           on to blow snow off, because of nearby higher structures or trees
      pg ⫽ ground snow load, lb / ft2
For roofs sheltered from the wind, increase pƒ computed from Eq. (5.16) by 20%,
and for windy sites, reduce pƒ 10%. For a poorly insulated roof with heated space
underneath, decrease pƒ by 30%.
   Increase pƒ 10% for large office buildings and public-assembly buildings, such
as auditoriums, schools, factories. Increase pƒ 20% for essential buildings, such as
hospitals, communication buildings, police and fire stations, power plants, and for
structures housing expensive objects or equipment. Decrease p.ƒ 20% for structures
with low human occupancy, such as farm buildings.
   The ground snow load pg should be determined from an analysis of snow depths
recorded at or near the site of the proposed building. For a rough estimate in the
absence of building-code requirements, pg may be taken as follows for the United
States, except for mountainous regions:
   0–5 lb / ft2—southern states from about latitude N32⬚ southward
 10–15 lb / ft2—Pacific coast between latitudes N32⬚ and N40⬚ and other states
                between latitudes N32⬚ and N37⬚
 20–30 lb / ft2—Pacific coast from latitude N40⬚ northward and other states between
                latitudes N37⬚ and N40⬚
 40–50 lb / ft2—north Atlantic and central states between latitudes N40⬚ and N43⬚
 60–80 lb / ft2—northern New England between latitudes N43⬚ and N45⬚ and cen-
                tral states from N43⬚ northward
80–120 lb / ft2—Maine above latitude N45⬚
   For sloping roofs, the snow load depends on whether the roof will be warm or
cold. In either case, the load may be assumed to be zero for roofs making an angle
␪ of 70⬚ or more with the horizontal. Also, for any slope, the load need not be
taken greater than pƒ given by Eq. (5.16). For slopes ␪, deg, between 0⬚ and 70⬚,
the snow load, lb / ft2, acting vertically on the projection of the roof on a horizontal
plane, may be computed for warm roofs from

                               ps ⫽   冉70 ⫺ ␪
                                         40     冊
                                              pƒ ⱕ p ƒ                           (5.17)

and for cold roofs from

                               ps ⫽   冉70 ⫺ ␪
                                         25     冊
                                              pƒ ⱕ p ƒ                           (5.18)

   Hip and gable roofs should be designed for the condition of the whole roof
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.15


loaded with ps, and also with the windward wide unloaded and the leeward side
carrying 1.5ps.
   For curved roofs, the snow load on the portion that is steeper than 70p⬚ may
be taken as zero. For the less-steep portion, the load ps may be computed as for a
sloped roof, with ␪ taken as the angle with the horizontal of a line from the crown
to points on the roof where the slope starts to exceed 70⬚. Curved roofs should be
designed with the whole area fully loaded with ps. They also should be designed
for the case of snow only on the leeward side, with the load varying uniformly
from 0.5ps at the crown to 2ps at points where the roof slope starts to exceed 30⬚
and then decreasing to zero at points where the slope starts to exceed 70⬚.
   Multiple folded-plate, sawtooth, and barrel-vault roofs similarly should be
designed for unbalanced loads increasing from 0.5ps at ridges to 3ps in valleys.
   Snow drifts may form on a roof near a higher roof that is less than 20 ft
horizontally away. The reason for this is that wind may blow snow from the higher
roof onto the lower roof. Drifts also may accumulate at projections above roofs,
such as at parapets, solar collectors, and penthouse walls. Drift loads accordingly
should be taken into account when:

1. The ground snow load pg exceeds 10 lb / ft2.
2. A higher roof exists (or may be built in the future) within 20 ft of the building,
   if the height differential, ft, exceeds 1.2pƒ / ␥, where pƒ is computed from Eq.
   (5.16) and ␥ is the snow density, lb / ft3.
3. A projection extends a distance, ft, exceeding 1.2pƒ / ␥ above the roof and is
   more than 15 ft long.

   In computation of drift loads, the snow density ␥, lb / ft3, may be taken as fol-
lows:

                       pg ⫽ 11–30        31–60       60 or more
                        ␥ ⫽ 15             20            25

The drift may be assumed to be a triangular prism with maximum height, located
adjacent to a higher roof or along a projection, taken as hd ⫽ 2pg / ␥, modified by
factors for risk and exposure, described for flat roofs. Width of the prism should
be at least 10 ft and may be taken as 3hd for projections up to 50 ft long and as
4hd for projections more than 50 ft long. Accordingly, the load varies uniformly
with distance from a projection, from hd␥ at the projection to zero. For drifts due
to snow load from a higher roof at a horizontal distance S, fit, away horizontally
(S ⱕ 20 ft), the maximum drift intensity may be taken as hd␥ (20 ⫺ S) / 20.

Rain-Snow Load Combination. In roof design, account should be taken of the
combination of the design snow load with a temporary water load from an intense
rainstorm, including the effects of roof deflection on ponding. The added water load
depends on the drainage characteristics of the roof, which, in turn, depend on the
roof slope. For a flat roof, the rain surcharge may be taken as 8 lb / ft2 for slopes
less 1⁄4 in / ft and as 5 lb / ft2 for steeper slopes, except where the minimum allowable
design snow load pmin exceeds pƒ computed from Eq. (5.16). In such cases, these
water surcharges may be reduced by pmin ⫺ pƒ .
   (W. Tobiasson and R. Redfield, ‘‘Snow Loads for the United States,’’ Part II,
and S. C. Colbeck, ‘‘Snow Loads Resulting from Rain on Snow,’’ U.S. Army Cold
Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, N.H.)
5.16                                SECTION FIVE


Seismic Loads. These are the result of horizontal and vertical movements imposed
on a building by earth vibrations during an earthquake. Changing accelerations of
the building mass during the temblor create changing inertial forces. These are
assumed in building design to act as seismic loads at the various floor and roof
levels in proportion to the portion of the building mass at those levels. Because
analysis of building response to such dynamic loading generally is very complex,
building codes permit, for design of ordinary buildings, substitution of equivalent
static loading for the dynamic loading (see Art. 5.18.6).
    (‘‘Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures,’’ ASCE 7-98,
American Society of Civil Engineers, 345 E. 47th St., New York, NY 10164-0619;
‘‘International Building Code 2000,’’ 1998.)


5.1.3     Factored Loads

Structural members must be designed with sufficient capacity to sustain without
excessive deformation or failure those combinations of service loads that will pro-
duce the most unfavorable effects. Also, the effects of such conditions as ponding
of water on roofs, saturation of soils, settlement, and dimensional changes must be
included. In determination of the structural capacity of a member or structure, a
safety margin must be provided and the possibility of variations of material prop-
erties from assumed design values and of inexactness of capacity calculations must
be taken into account.
    Building codes may permit either of two methods, allowable-stress design or
load–and–resistance factor design (also known as ultimate-strength design), to be
used for a structural material. In both methods, design loads, which determine the
required structural capacity, are calculated by multiplying combinations of service
loads by factors. Different factors are applied to the various possible load combi-
nations in accordance with the probability of occurrence of the loads.
    In allowable-stress design, required capacity is usually determined by the load
combination that causes severe cracking or excessive deformation. For the purpose,
dead, live, wind, seismic, snow, and other loads that may be imposed simultane-
ously are added together, then multiplied by a factor equal to or less than 1. Load
combinations usually considered in allowable-stress design are

(1)    D ⫹ L ⫹ (Lr or S or R)
(2)    D ⫹ L ⫹ (W or E / 1.4)
(3)    D ⫹ L ⫹ W ⫹ S/2
(4)    D ⫹ L ⫹ S ⫹ W/2
(5)    D ⫹ L ⫹ S ⫹ E / 1.4
(6)    0.9D ⫺ E / 1.4

where D ⫽     dead load
      L⫽      live loads due to intended use of occupancy, including partitions
      Lr ⫽    roof live loads
       S⫽     snow loads
      R⫽      rain loads
      W⫽      wind loads
      E⫽      seismic loads
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.17


Building codes usually permit a smaller factor when the probability is small that
combinations of extreme loads, such as dead load plus maximum live load plus
maximum wind or seismic forces, will occur. Generally, for example, a factor of
0.75 is applied to load-combination sums (2) to (6). Such factors are equivalent to
permitting higher allowable unit stresses for the applicable loading conditions than
for load combination (1). The allowable stress is obtained by dividing the unit stress
causing excessive deformation or failure by a factor greater than 1.
    In load–and–resistance factor design, the various types of loads are each mul-
tiplied by a load factor, the value of which is selected in accordance with the
probability of occurrence of each type of load. The factored loads are then added
to obtain the total load a member or system must sustain. A structural member is
selected to provide a load-carrying capacity exceeding that sum. This capacity is
determined by multiplying the ultimate-load capacity by a resistance factor, the
value of which reflects the reliability of the estimate of capacity. Load criteria
generally used are as follows:

1.   1.4D
2.   1.2D   ⫹ 1.6L ⫹ 0.5(Lr or S or R)
3.   1.2D   ⫹ 1.6(Lr or S or R) ⫹ (0.5L or 0.8W )
4.   1.2D   ⫹ 1.3W ⫹ 0.5 (Lr or S or R)
5.   1.2D   ⫹ 1.0E ⫹ (0.5L or 0.2S)
6.   0.9D    (1.3W or 1.0E)

For garages, places of public assembly, and areas for which live loads exceed 100
lb / ft2, the load factor usually is taken as unit for L in combinations 3, 4, and 5.
For roof configurations that do not shed snow off the structure, the load factor
should be taken as 0.7 for snow loads in combination 5.
     For concrete structures where load combinations do not include seismic forces,
the factored load combinations of ACI 318 Section 9.2 shall be used.
     For both allowable stress design and strength design methods, elements and
components shall be designed to resist the forces due to special seismic load com-
binations

a) 1.2D ⫹ 0.5L ⫹ Em
b) 0.9D ⫺ Em

For floors in places of public assembly, for live load in excess of 100 psf, and for
parking garage live load, the load factor is taken as 1.0 for L. Em is the maximum
seismic effect of horizontal and vertical forces.



5.2    STRESS AND STRAIN

Structural capacity, or ultimate strength, is that property of a structural member that
serves as a measure of is ability to support all potential loads without severe crack-
ing or excessive deformations. To indicate when the limit on load-carrying useful-
ness has been reached, design specifications for the various structural materials
establish allowable unit stresses or design strengths that may not be exceeded under
5.18                                   SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.1 Truss in equilibrium under load.     FIGURE 5.2 Portion of a truss is held in equi-
Upward acting forces equal those acting down-   librium by stresses in its components.
ward.


maximum loading. Structural theory provides methods for calculating unit stresses
and for estimating deformations. Many of these methods are presented in the rest
of this section.


5.2.1   Static Equilibrium

If a structure and its components are so supported that, after a very small defor-
mation occurs, no further motion is possible, they are said to be in equilibrium.
Under such circumstances, internal forces, or stresses, exactly counteract the loads.
   Several useful conclusions may be drawn from the state of static equilibrium:
Since there is no translatory motion, the sum of the external forces must be zero;
and since there is no rotation, the sum of the moments of the external forces about
any point must be zero.
   For the same reason, if we consider any portion of the structure and the loads
on it, the sum of the external and internal forces on the boundaries of that section
must be zero. Also, the sum of the moments of these forces must be zero.
   In Fig. 5.1, for example, the sum of the forces RL and RR needed to support the
roof truss is equal to be the 20-kip load on the truss (1 kip ⫽ 1 kilopound ⫽ 1000
lb ⫽ 0.5 ton). Also, the sum of moments of the external forces is zero about any
point. About the right end, for instance, it is 40 ⫻ 15 ⫺ 30 ⫻ 20 ⫽ 600 ⫺ 600.
   In Fig. 5.2 is shown the portion of the truss to the left of section AA. The internal
forces at the cut members balance the external load and hold this piece of the truss
in equilibrium.
   Generally, it is convenient to decompose the forces acting on a structure into
components parallel to a set of perpendicular axes that will simplify computations.
For example, for forces in a single plane—a condition commonly encountered in
building design—the most useful technique is to resolve all forces into horizontal
and vertical components. Then, for a structure in equilibrium, if H represents the
horizontal components, V the vertical components, and M the moments of the com-
ponents about any point in the plane,
                         兺H ⫽ 0         兺V ⫽ 0     and 兺M ⫽ 0                          (5.19)
   These three equations may be used to evaluate three unknowns in any non-
concurrent coplanar force system, such as the roof truss in Figs. 5.1 and 5.2. They
may determine the magnitude of three forces for which the direction and point of
application already are known, or the magnitude, direction, and point of application
of a single force.
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                   5.19


   Suppose, for the truss in Fig. 5.1, the reactions at the supports are to be com-
puted. Taking moments about the right end and equating to zero yields 40 Rl ⫺ 30
⫻ 20 ⫽ 0, from which left reaction RL ⫽ 600 / 40 ⫽ 15 kips. Equating the sum of
the vertical forces to zero gives 20 ⫺ 15 ⫺ RR ⫽ 0, from which the right reaction
RR ⫽ 5 kips.


5.2.2   Unit Stress and Strain

To ascertain whether a structural member has adequate load-carrying capacity, the
designer generally has to compute the maximum unit stress produced by design
loads in the member for each type of internal force—tensile, compressive, or shear-
ing—and compare it with the corresponding allowable unit stress.
    When the loading is such that the unit stress is constant over a section under
consideration, the stress may be obtained by dividing the force by the area of the
section. But in general, the unit stress varies from point to point. In that case, the
unit stress at any point in the section is the limiting value of the ratio of the internal
force on any small area to that area, as the area is taken smaller and smaller.
    Sometimes in the design of a structure, unit stress may not be the prime con-
sideration. The designer may be more interested in limiting the deformation or
strain.
    Deformation in any direction is the total change in the dimension of a member
in that direction.
    Unit strain in any direction is the deformation per unit of length in that direc-
tion.
    When the loading is such that the unit strain is constant over a portion of a
member, it may be obtained by dividing the deformation by the original length of
that portion. In general, however, the unit strain varies from point to point in a
member. Like a varying unit stress, it represents the limiting value of a ratio.


5.2.3   Hooke’s Law
For many materials, unit strain is proportional to unit stress, until a certain stress,
the proportional limit, is exceeded. Known as Hooke’s law, this relationship may
be written as
                                                      ƒ
                                 ƒ ⫽ E⑀ or ⑀ ⫽                                     (5.20)
                                                      E
where ƒ ⫽ unit stress
      ⑀ ⫽ unit strain
      E ⫽ modulus of elasticity
Hence, when the unit stress and modulus of elasticity of a material are known, the
unit strain can be computed. Conversely, when the unit strain has been found, the
unit stress can be calculated.
   When a member is loaded and the unit stress does ot exceed the proportional
limit, the member will return to its original dimensions when the load is removed.
The elastic limit is the largest unit stress that can be developed without a permanent
deformation remaining after removal of the load.
   Some materials possess one or two yield points. These are unit stresses in the
region of which there appears to be an increase in strain with no increase or a small
5.20                               SECTION FIVE


decrease in stress. Thus, the materials exhibit plastic deformation. For materials
that do not have a well-defined yield point, the offset yield strength is used as a
measure of the beginning of plastic deformation.
   The offset yield strength, or proof stress as it is sometimes referred to, is
defined as the unit stress corresponding to a permanent deformation, usually 0.01%
(0.0001 in / in) or 0.20% (0.002 in / in).



5.2.4   Constant Unit Stress

The simplest cases of stress and strain are those in which the unit stress and strain
are constant. Stresses due to an axial tension or compression load or a centrally
applied shearing force are examples; also an evenly applied bearing load. These
loading conditions are illustrated in Figs. 5.3 to 5.6.
   For the axial tension and compression loadings, we take a section normal to the
centroidal axis (and to the applied forces). For the shearing load, the section is
taken along a plane of sliding. And for the bearing load, it is chosen through the
plane of contact between the two members.




FIGURE 5.3 Tension member.                  FIGURE 5.4 Compression member.




FIGURE 5.5 Bracket in shear.                FIGURE 5.6 Bearing load and pressure.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.21


   Since for these loading conditions, the unit stress is constant across the section,
the equation of equilibrium may be written
                                      P ⫽ Aƒ                                   (5.21)
where P ⫽ load
      ƒ ⫽ a tensile, compressive, shearing, or bearing unit stress
      A ⫽ cross-sectional area for tensile or compressive forces, or area on which
          sliding may occur for shearing forces, or contact area for bearing loads
For torsional stresses, see Art. 5.4.2.
   The unit strain for the axial tensile and compressive loads is given by the equa-
tion
                                             e
                                        ⑀⫽                                     (5.22)
                                             L
where ⑀ ⫽ unit strain
      e ⫽ total lengthening or shortening of the member
      L ⫽ original length of the member
Applying Hooke’s law and Eq. (5.22) to Eq. (5.21) yield a convenient formula for
the deformation:
                                            PL
                                       e⫽                                      (5.23)
                                            AE
where P ⫽ load on the member
      A ⫽ its cross-sectional area
      E ⫽ modulus of elasticity of the material
[Since long compression members tend to buckle, Eqs. (5.21) to (5.23) are appli-
cable only to short members.]
    While tension and compression strains represent a simple stretching or short-
ening of a member, shearing strain represents a distortion due to a small rotation.
The load on the small rectangular portion of the member in Fig. 5.5 tends to distort
it into a parallelogram. The unit shearing strain is the change in the right angle,
measured in radians.
    Modulus of rigidity, or shearing modulus of elasticity, is defined by
                                             v
                                       G⫽                                      (5.24)
                                             ␥
where G ⫽ modulus of rigidity
      v ⫽ unit shearing stress
      ␥ ⫽ unit shearing strain
It is related to the modulus of elasticity in tension and compression E by the
equation
                                             E
                                   G⫽                                          (5.25)
                                        2 (1 ⫹ ␮)
where ␮ is a constant known as Poisson’s ratio.
5.22                                 SECTION FIVE


5.2.5   Poisson’s Ratio

Within the elastic limit, when a material is subjected to axial loads, it deforms not
only longitudinally but also laterally. Under tension, the cross section of a member
decreases, and under compression, it increases. The ratio of the unit lateral strain
to the unit longitudinal strain is called Poisson’s ratio.
   For many materials, this ratio can be taken equal to 0.25. For structural steel, it
is usually assumed to be 0.3.
   Assume, for example, that a steel hanger with an area of 2 in2 carries a 40-kip
(40,000-lb) load. The unit stress is 40,000 / 2, or 20,000 psi. The unit tensile strain,
taking the modulus of elasticity of the steel as 30,000,000 psi, is 20,000 /
30,000,000, or 0.00067 in / in. With Poisson’s ratio as 0.3, the unit lateral strain is
⫺0.3 ⫻ 0.00067, or a shortening of 0.00020 in / in.


5.2.6   Thermal Stresses

When the temperature of a body changes, its dimensions also change. Forces are
required to prevent such dimensional changes, and stresses are set up in the body
by these forces.
   If ␣ is the coefficient of expansion of the material and T the change in temper-
ature, the unit strain in a bar restrained by external forces from expanding or con-
tracting is
                                        ⑀ ⫽ ␣T                                   (5.26)
According to Hooke’s law, the stress ƒ in the bar is
                                       ƒ ⫽ E␣T                                   (5.27)
where E ⫽ modulus of elasticity.


5.2.7   Strain Energy

When a bar is stressed, energy is stored in it. If a bar supporting a load P undergoes
a deformation e the energy stored in it is

                                      U ⫽ 1⁄2 Pe                                 (5.28)
This equation assumes the load was applied gradually and the bar is not stressed
beyond the proportional limit. It represents the area under the load-deformation
curve up to the load P. Applying Eqs. (5.20) and (5.21) to Eq. (5.28) gives another
useful equation for energy:
                                           ƒ2
                                      U⫽      AL                                 (5.29)
                                           2E
where ƒ   ⫽   unit stress
      E   ⫽   modulus of elasticity of the material
      A   ⫽   cross-sectional area
      L   ⫽   length of the bar
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.23


    Since AL is the volume of the bar, the term ƒ 2 / 2E indicates the energy stored
per unit of volume. It represents the area under the stress-strain curve up to the
stress ƒ. Its value when the bar is stressed to the proportional limit is called the
modulus of resilience. This modulus is a measure of the capacity of the material
to absorb energy without danger of being permanently deformed and is of impor-
tance in designing members to resist energy loads.
    Equation (5.28) is a general equation that holds true when the principle of su-
perposition applies (the total deformation produced by a system of forces is equal
to the sum of the elongations produced by each force). In the general sense, P in
Eq. (5.28) represents any group of statically interdependent forces that can be com-
pletely defined by one symbol, and e is the corresponding deformation.
    The strain-energy equation can be written as a function of either the load or the
deformation.
    For axial tension or compression:

                                    P 2L             AEe 2
                               U⫽               U⫽                            (5.30)
                                    2AE               2L

where P   ⫽   axial load
      e   ⫽   total elongation not shortening
      L   ⫽   length of the member
      A   ⫽   cross-sectional area
      E   ⫽   modulus of elasticity

   For pure shear:

                                    V 2L             AGe2
                               U⫽               U⫽                            (5.31)
                                    2AG               2L

where V   ⫽   shearing load
      e   ⫽   shearing deformation
      L   ⫽   length over which deformation takes place
      A   ⫽   shearing area
      G   ⫽   shearing modulus

   For torsion:

                                    T 2L             JG␾2
                               U⫽               U⫽                            (5.32)
                                    2 JG              2L

where T   ⫽   torque
      ␾   ⫽   angle of twist
      L   ⫽   length of shaft
      J   ⫽   polar moment of inertia of the cross section
      G   ⫽   shearing modulus

   For pure bending (constant moment):

                                    M 2L             EI␪ 2
                               U⫽               U⫽                            (5.33)
                                    2EI               2L
5.24                                 SECTION FIVE


where M    ⫽   bending moment
      ␪    ⫽   angle of rotation of one end of the beam with respect to the other
      L    ⫽   length of beam
       I   ⫽   moment of inertia of the cross section
      E    ⫽   modulus of elasticity

For beams carrying transverse loads, the strain energy is the sum of the energy for
bending and that for shear.
   See also Art. 5.10.4.




5.3     STRESSES AT A POINT

Tensile and compressive stresses are sometimes referred to also as normal stresses,
because they act normal to the cross section. Under this concept, tensile stresses
are considered as positive normal stresses and compressive stresses as negative.



5.3.1   Stress Notation

Suppose a member of a structure is acted upon by forces in all directions. For
convenience, let us establish a reference set of perpendicular coordinate x, y, and
z axes. Now let us take at some point in the member a small cube with sides parallel
to the coordinate axes. The notations commonly used for the components of stress
acting on the sides of this element and the directions assumed as positive are shown
in Fig. 5.7.
    For example, for the sides of the element perpendicular to the z axis, the normal
component of stress is denoted by ƒz. The shearing stress v is resolved into two
components and requires two subscript letters for a complete description. The first
letter indicates the direction of the normal to the plane under consideration. The
second letter indicates the direction of the component of the stress. For the sides
perpendicular to the z axis, the shear component in the x direction is labeled vzx
and that in the y direction vzy.



5.3.2   Stress and Strain Components

If, for the small cube in Fig. 5.7, moments of the forces acting on it are taken a
bout the x axis, considering the cube’s dimensions as dx, dy, and dz, the equation
of equilibrium requires that

                              vzy dx dy dz ⫽ vyz dx dy dz

(Forces are taken equal to the product of the area of the face and the stress at the
center.) Two similar equations can be written for moments taken about the y axis
and z axis. These equations show that
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                     5.25


                         vxy ⫽ vyx   vzx ⫽ vxz     and vzy ⫽ vyx                     (5.34)
                                                 In words, the components of shearing
                                                 stress on two perpendicular faces and
                                                 acting normal to the intersection of the
                                                 faces are equal.
                                                     Consequently, to describe the
                                                 stresses acting on the coordinate planes
                                                 through a point, only six quantities need
                                                 be known. These stress components are
                                                 ƒx, ƒy , ƒz vxy ⫽ vyx, vyz ⫽ vzy, and vzx ⫽
                                                 vxz.
                                                     If the cube in Fig. 5.7 is acted on
                                                 only by normal stresses ƒx, ƒy , and ƒz,
                                                 from Hooke’s law and the application of
                                                 Poisson’s ratio, the unit strains in the x,
                                                 y, and z directions, in accordance with
FIGURE 5.7 Normal and shear stresses in an
orthogonal coordinate system.                    Arts. 5.2.3 and 5.2.4, are, respectively,
                                     1
                              ⑀x ⫽     [ ƒ ⫺ ␮( ƒy ⫹ ƒz)]
                                     E x
                                     1
                              ⑀y ⫽     [ ƒ ⫺ ␮( ƒx ⫹ ƒz)]                            (5.35)
                                     E y
                                     1
                              ⑀z ⫽     [ ƒ ⫺ ␮( ƒx ⫹ ƒy)]
                                     E z
where ␮ ⫽ Poisson’s ratio. If only shearing stresses act on the cube in Fig. 5.7,
the distortion of the angle between edges parallel to any two coordinate axes de-
pends only on shearing-stress components parallel to those axes. Thus, the unit
shearing strains are (see Art. 5.2.4)
                         1         1                                  1
                 ␥xy ⫽     v  ␥yz ⫽ vyx             and       ␥zx ⫽     v            (5.36)
                         G xy      G                                  G zx


                                                 5.3.3    Two-Dimensional Stress

                                                 When the six components of stress nec-
                                                 essary to describe the stresses at a point
                                                 are known (Art. 5.3.2), the stress on any
                                                 inclined plane through the same point
                                                 can be determined. For the case of two-
                                                 dimensional stress, only three stress
                                                 components need be known.
                                                     Assume, for example, that at a point
                                                 O in a stressed plate, the components ƒx,
                                                 ƒy , and vxy are known (Fig. 5.8). To find
FIGURE 5.8 Normal and shear stresses at a        the stresses for any plane through the z
point on a plane inclined to the axes.           axis, take a plane parallel to it close to
5.26                                SECTION FIVE


O. This plane and the coordinate planes from a triangular prism. Then, if ␣ is the
angle the normal to the plane makes with the x axis, the normal and shearing
stresses on the inclined plane, obtained by application of the equations of equilib-
rium, are
                 ƒ ⫽ ƒx cos2 ␣ ⫹ ƒy sin2 ␣ ⫹ 2vxy sin ␣ cos ␣                   (5.37)

                 v ⫽ vxy (cos2 ␣ ⫺ sin2 ␣) ⫹ ( ƒy ⫺ ƒx) sin ␣ cos ␣             (5.38)
    Note. All structural members are three-dimensional. While two-dimensional-
stress calculations may be sufficiently accurate for most practical purposes, this is
not always the case. For example, although loads may create normal stresses on
two perpendicular planes, a third normal stress also exists, as computed with Pois-
son’s ratio. [See Eq. (5.35).]


5.3.4   Principal Stresses

A plane through a point on which stresses act may be assigned a direction for
which the normal stress is a maximum or a minimum. There are two such positions,
perpendicular to each other. And on those planes, there are no shearing stresses.
   The direction in which the normal stresses become maximum or minimum are
called principal directions and the corresponding normal stresses principal stresses.
   To find the principal directions, set the value of v given by Eq. (5.38) equal to
zero. The resulting equation is
                                               2vxy
                                  tan 2␣ ⫽                                      (5.39)
                                             ƒx ⫺ ƒy
  If the x and y axes are taken in the principal directions, vxy is zero. Consequently,
Eqs. (5.37) and (5.38) may be simplified to
                             ƒ ⫽ ƒx cos2 ␣ ⫹ ƒy sin2 ␣                          (5.40)

                             v ⫽ 1⁄2 sin 2␣( ƒy ⫺ ƒx)                           (5.41)
where ƒ and v are, respectively, the normal and sharing stress on a plane at an
angle ␣ with the principal planes and ƒx and ƒy are the principal stresses.

Pure Shear. If on any two perpendicular planes only shearing stresses act, the
state of stress at the point is called pure shear or simple shear. Under such condi-
tions, the principal directions bisect the angles between the planes on which these
shearing stresses occur. The principal stresses are equal in magnitude to the unit
shearing stresses.


5.3.5   Maximum Shearing Stress

The maximum unit shearing stress occurs on each of two planes that bisect the
angles between the planes on which the principal stresses act. The maximum share
is equal to one-half the algebraic difference of the principal stresses:
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.27


                                             ƒ1 ⫺ ƒ2
                                   max v ⫽                                        (5.42)
                                                2
where ƒ1 is the maximum principal stress and ƒ2 the minimum.


5.3.6   Mohr’s Circle

The relationship between stresses at a point may be represented conveniently on
Mohr’s circle (Fig. 5.9). In this diagram, normal stress ƒ and shear stress v are
taken as coordinates. Then, for each plane through the point, there will correspond
a point on the circle, whose coordinates are the values of ƒ and v for the plane.
    To construct the circle given the principal stresses, mark off the principal stresses
ƒ1 and ƒ2 on the ƒ axis (points A and B in Fig. 5.9). Tensile stresses are measured
to the right of the v axis and compressive stresses to the left. Construct a circle
with its center on the ƒ axis and passing through the two points representing the
principal stresses. This is the Mohr’s circle for the given stresses at the point under
consideration.
    Suppose now, we wish to find the stresses on a plane at an angle ␣ to the plane
of ƒ1. If a radius is drawn making an angle 2␣ with the ƒ axis, the coordinates of
its intersection with the circle represent the normal and sharing stresses acting on
the plane.
    Mohr’s circle an also be plotted when the principal stresses are not known but
the stresses ƒx, ƒy , and vxy , on any two perpendicular planes, are. The procedure is
to plot the two points representing these known stresses with respect to the ƒ and
v axies (points C and D in Fig. 5.10). The line joining these points is a diameter




FIGURE 5.9 Mohr’s circle for stresses at a    FIGURE 5.10 Stress circle constructed from
point—constructed from known principal        two known positive stresses ƒx and ƒy and a
stresses.                                     shear stress vxy.
5.28                                SECTION FIVE


of Mohr’s circle. Constructing the circle on this diameter, we find the principal
stresses at the intersection with the ƒ axis (points A and B in Fig. 5.10).
    For more details on the relationship of stresses and strains at a point, see
Timoshenko and Goodier, ‘‘Theory of Elasticity,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Com-
pany, New York.



5.4     TORSION

Forces that cause a member to twist about a longitudinal axis are called torsional
loads. Simple torsion is produced only by a couple, or moment, in a plane perpen-
dicular to the axis.
   If a couple lies in a nonperpendicular plane, it can be resolved into a torsional
moment, in a plane perpendicular to the axis, and bending moments, in planes
through the axis.


5.4.1   Shear Center

The point in each normal section of a member through which the axis passes and
about which the section twists is called the share center. The location of the shear
center depends on the shape and dimensions of the cross section. If the loads on a
beam do not pass through the shear center, they cause the beam to twist. See also
Art. 5.5.19.
   If a beam has an axis of symmetry, the shear center lies on it. In doubly sym-
metrical beams, the share center lies at the intersection of the two axes of symmetry
and hence coincides with the centroid.
   For any section composed of two narrow rectangles, such as a T beam or an
angle, the shear center may be taken as the intersection of the longitudinal center
lines of the rectangles.
   For a channel section with one axis of symmetry, the shear center is outside the
section at a distance from the centroid equal to e(1 ⫹ h2A / 4I ), where e is the
distance from the centroid to the center of the web, h is the depth of the channel,
A the cross-sectional area, and I the moment of inertia about the axis of symmetry.
(The web lies between the shear center and the centroid.)
   Locations of shear centers for several other sections are given in Friedrich
Bleich, ‘‘Buckling Strength of Metal Structures,’’ Chap. III, McGraw-Hill Publish-
ing Company, New York.


5.4.2   Stresses Due to Torsion

Simple torsion is resisted by internal shearing stresses. These can be resolved into
radial and tangential shearing stresses, which being normal to each other also are
equal (see Art. 5.3.2). Furthermore, on planes that bisect the angles between the
planes on which the shearing stresses act, there also occur compressive and tensile
stresses. The magnitude of these normal stresses is equal to that of the shear. There-
fore, when torsional loading is combined with other types of loading, the maximum
stresses occur on inclined planes and can be computed by the methods of Arts.
5.3.3 and 5.3.6.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.29


Circular Sections. If a circular shaft (hollow or solid) is twisted, a section that is
plane before twisting remains plane after twisting. Within the proportional limit,
the shearing unit stress at any point in a transverse section varies with the distance
from the center of the section. The maximum shear, psi, occurs at the circumference
and is given by
                                            Tr
                                       v⫽                                       (5.43)
                                            J
where T ⫽ torsional moment, in-lb
      r ⫽ radius of section, in
      J ⫽ polar moment of inertia, in4
   Polar moment of inertia of a cross section is defined by

                                    J⫽   冕␳   2
                                                  dA                            (5.44)

where ␳ ⫽ radius from shear center to any point in the section
    d A ⫽ differential area at the point
In general, J equals the sum of the moments of inertia above any two perpendicular
axes through the shear center. For a solid circular section, J ⫽ ␲r 4 / 2. For a hollow
circular section with diameters D and d, J ⫽ ␲ (D4 ⫺ d 4) / 32.
   Within the proportional limits, the angular twist between two points L inches
apart along the axis of a circular bar is, in radians (1 rad ⫽ 57.3⬚):
                                            TL
                                       ␪⫽                                       (5.45)
                                            GJ
where G is the shearing modulus of elasticity (see Art. 5.2.4).

Noncircular Sections. If a shaft is not circular, a plane transverse section before
twisting does not remain plane after twisting. The resulting warping increases the
shearing stresses in some parts of the section and decreases them in others, com-
pared wit the sharing stresses that would occur if the section remained plane. Con-
sequently, shearing stresses in a noncircular section are not proportional to distances
from the share center. In elliptical and rectangular sections, for example, maximum
shear occurs on the circumference at a point nearest the shear center.
   For a solid rectangular section, this maximum may be expressed in the following
form:
                                             T
                                      v⫽                                        (5.46)
                                            kb2d
where b   ⫽   short side of rectangle, in
      d   ⫽   long side, in
      k   ⫽   constant depending on ratio of these sides;
   d/b    ⫽   1.0       1.5       2.0     3         4     5              10          ⬁
      k   ⫽   0.208 0.231 0.246 0.258 0.267 0.282 0.291                 0.312    0.333
(S. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier, ‘‘Theory of Elasticity,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing
Company, New York.)
5.30                                SECTION FIVE


Hollow Tubes. If a thin-shell hollow tube is twisted, the shearing force per unit
of length on a cross section (shear flow) is given approximately by
                                             T
                                      H⫽                                       (5.47)
                                            2A
where A is the area enclosed by the mean perimeter of the tube, in2, and the unit
shearing stress is given approximately by
                                         H    T
                                    v⫽     ⫽                                   (5.48)
                                         t   2At
where t is the thickness of the tube, in. For a rectangular tube with sides of unequal
thickness, the total shear flow can be computed from Eq. (5.47) and the shearing
stress along each side from Eq. (5.48), except at the corners, where there may be
appreciable stress concentration.

Channels and I Beams. For a narrow rectangular section, the maximum shear is
very nearly equal to

                                           t1⁄3
                                      v⫽                                       (5.49)
                                           b2d
   This formula also can be used to find the maximum shearing stress due to torsion
in members, such as I beams and channels, made up of thin rectangular components.
Let J ⫽ 1⁄3兺b3d, where b is the thickness of each rectangular component and d the
corresponding length. Then, the maximum shear is given approximately by
                                           Tb⬘
                                      v⫽                                       (5.50)
                                            J
where b⬘ is the thickness of the web or the flange of the member. Maximum shear
will occur at the center of one of the long sides of the rectangular part that has the
greatest thickness. (A. P. Boresi, O. Sidebottom, F. B. Seely, and J. O. Smith,
‘‘Advanced Mechanics of Materials,’’ 3d ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.)


5.5     STRAIGHT BEAMS

Beams are the horizontal members used to support vertically applied loads across
an opening. In a more general sense, they are structural members that external loads
tend to bend, or curve. Usually, the term beam is applied to members with top
continuously connected to bottom throughout their length, and those with top and
bottom connected at intervals are called trusses. See also Structural System, Art.
1.7.


5.5.1   Types of Beams

There are many ways in which beams may be supported. Some of the more common
methods are shown in Figs. 5.11 to 5.16.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.31




FIGURE 5.11 Simple beam.                    FIGURE 5.12 Cantilever beam.




FIGURE 5.13 Beam with one end fixed.        FIGURE 5.14 Fixed-end beam.




FIGURE 5.15 Beam with overhangs.            FIGURE 5.16 Continuous beam.



    The beam in Fig. 5.11 is called a simply supported, or simple beam. It has
supports near its ends, which restrain it only against vertical movement. The ends
of the beam are free to rotate. When the loads have a horizontal component, or
when change in length of the beam due to temperature may be important, the
supports may also have to prevent horizontal motion. In that case, horizontal re-
straint at one support is generally sufficient.
    The distance between the supports is called the span. The load carried by each
support is called a reaction.
    The beam in Fig. 5.12 is a cantilever. It has only one support, which restrains
it from rotating or moving horizontally or vertically at that end. Such a support is
called a fixed end.
    If a simple support is placed under the free end of the cantilever, the propped
beam in Fig. 5.13 results. It has one end fixed, one end simply supported.
    The beam in Fig. 5.14 has both ends fixed. No rotation or vertical movement
can occur at either end. In actual practice, a fully fixed end can seldom be obtained.
Some rotation of the beam ends generally is permitted. Most support conditions
are intermediate between those for a simple beam and those for a fixed-end beam.
    In Fig. 5.15 is shown a beam that overhangs both is simple supports. The over-
hangs have a free end, like cantilever, but the supports permit rotation.
    When a beam extends over several supports, it is called a continuous beam
(Fig. 5.16).
    Reactions for the beams in Figs. 5.11, 5.12, and 5.15 may be found from the
equations of equilibrium. They are classified as statically determinate beams for
that reason.
    The equations of equilibrium, however, are not sufficient to determine the re-
actions of the beams in Figs. 5.13, 5.14, and 5.16. For those beams, there are more
unknowns than equations. Additional equations must be obtained on the basis of
deformations permitted; on the knowledge, for example, that a fixed end permits
no rotation. Such beams are classified as statically indeterminate. Methods for
finding the stresses in that type of beam are given in Arts. 5.10.4, 5.10.5, 5.11, and
5.13.
5.32                                SECTION FIVE


5.5.2   Reactions

As an example of the application of the equations of equilibrium (Art. 5.2.1) to the
determination of the reactions of a statically determinate beam, we shall compute
                                            the reactions of the 60-ft-long beam
                                            with overhangs in Fig. 5.17. This beam
                                            carries a uniform load of 200 lb / lin ft
                                            over its entire length and several con-
                                            centrated loads. The supports are 36 ft
                                            apart.
                                                To find reaction R1, we take moments
                                            about R2 and equate the sum of the mo-
FIGURE 5.17 Beam with overhangs loaded
with both uniform and concentrated loads.   ments to zero (clockwise rotation is con-
                                            sidered positive, counterclockwise, neg-
                                            ative):
         ⫺2000 ⫻ 48 ⫹ 36R1 ⫺ 4000 ⫻ 30 ⫺ 6000 ⫻ 18 ⫹ 3000 ⫻ 12
                               ⫺200 ⫻ 60 ⫻ 18 ⫽ 0
                                   R1 ⫽ 14,000 lb
In this calculation, the moment of the uniform load was found by taking the moment
of its resultant, which acts at the center of the beam.
    To find R2, we can either take moments about R1 or use the equation 兺V ⫽ 0.
It is generally preferable to apply the moment equation and use the other equation
as a check.
           3000 ⫻ 48 ⫺ 36R2 ⫹ 6000 ⫻ 18 ⫹ 4000 ⫻ 6 ⫺ 2000 ⫻ 12
                               ⫹ 200 ⫻ 60 ⫻ 18 ⫽ 0
                                   R2 ⫽ 13,000 lb
   As a check, we note that the sum of the reactions must equal the total applied
load:
           14,000 ⫹ 13,000 ⫽ 2000 ⫹ 4000 ⫹ 6000 ⫹ 3000 ⫹ 12,000
                                  27,000 ⫽ 27,000


5.5.3   Internal Forces

Since a beam is in equilibrium under the forces applied to it, it is evident that at
every section internal forces are acting to prevent motion. For example, suppose
we cut the beam in Fig. 5.17 vertically just to the right of its center. If we total
the external forces, including the reaction, to the left of this cut (see Fig. 5.18a),
we find there is an unbalanced downward load of 4000 lb. Evidently, at the cut
section, an upward-acting internal force of 4000 lb must be present to maintain
equilibrium. Again, if we take moments of the external forces about the section,
we find an unbalanced moment of 54,000 ft-lb. So there must be an internal moment
of 54,000 ft-lb acting to maintain equilibrium.
   This internal, or resisting, moment is produced by a couple consisting of a force
C acting on the top part of the beam and an equal but opposite force T acting on
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                   5.33




          FIGURE 5.18 Portions of a beam are held in equilibrium by internal
          stresses.




the bottom part (Fig. 18b). The top force is the resultant of compressive stresses
acting over the upper portion of the beam, and the bottom force is the resultant of
tensile stresses acting over the bottom part. The surface at which the stresses change
from compression to tension—where the stress is zero—is called the neutral sur-
face.
                                              5.5.4   Shear Diagrams

                                             The unbalanced external vertical force
                                             at a section is called the shear. It is equal
                                             to the algebraic sum of the forces that
                                             lie on either side of the section. Upward
                                             acting forces on the left of the section
                                             are considered positive, downward
                                             forces negative; signs are reversed for
                                             forces on the right.
                                                 A diagram in which the shear at
                                             every point along the length of a beam
                                             is plotted as an ordinate is called a shear
                                             diagram. The shear diagram for the
                                             beam in Fig. 5.17 is shown in Fig.
                                             5.19b.
                                                 The diagram was plotted starting
                                             from the left end. The 2000-lb load was
                                             plotted downward to a convenient scale.
                                             Then, the shear at the next concentrated
                                             load—the left support—was deter-
                                             mined. This equals ⫺2000 ⫺ 200 ⫻ 12,
                                             or ⫺4400 lb. In passing from must to
FIGURE 5.19 .Shear diagram for the beam the left of the support to a point just to
with loads shown in Fig. 5.17.               the right, however, the shear changes by
                                             the magnitude of the reaction. Hence, on
the right-hand side of the left support the shear is ⫺4400 ⫹ 14,000, or 9600 lb. At
the next concentrated load, the shear is 9600 ⫺ 200 ⫻ 6, or 8400 lb. In passing
the 4000-lb load, however, the shear changes to 8400 ⫺ 4000, or 4400 lb. Pro-
ceeding in this manner to the right end of the beam, we terminate with a shear of
3000 lb, equal to the load on the free end there.
   It should be noted that the shear diagram for a uniform load is a straight line
sloping downward to the right (see Fig. 5.21). Therefore, the shear diagram was
completed by connecting the plotted points with straight lines.
5.34                                   SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.20 Shear and moment diagrams           FIGURE 5.21 Shear and moment diagrams
for a simply supported beam with concentrated   for a simply supported, uniformly loaded beam.
loads.



   Shear diagrams for commonly encountered loading conditions are given in Figs.
5.30 to 5.41.



5.5.5   Bending-Moment Diagrams

The unbalanced moment of the external forces about a vertical section through a
beam is called the bending moment. It is equal to the algebraic sum of the moments
about the section of the external forces that lie on one side of the section. Clockwise
moments are considered positive, counterclockwise moments negative, when the
forces considered lie on the left of the section. Thus, when the bending moment is
positive, the bottom of the beam is in tension.
    A diagram in which the bending moment at every point along the length of a
beam is plotted as an ordinate is called a bending-moment diagram.
    Figure 5.20c is the bending-moment diagram for the beam loaded with concen-
trated loads only in Fig. 5.20a. The bending moment at the supports for this simply
supported beam obviously is zero. Between the supports and the first load, the
bending moment is proportional to the distance from the support, since it is equal
to the reaction times the distance from the support. Hence the bending-moment
diagram for this portion of the beam is a sloping straight line.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.35


   The bending moment under the 6000-lb load in Fig. 5.20a considering only the
force to the left is 7000 ⫻ 10, or 70,000 ft-lb. The bending-moment diagram, then,
between the left support and the first concentrated load is a straight line rising from
zero at the left end of the beam to 70,000 ft-lb, plotted to a convenient scale, under
the 6000-lb load.
   The bending moment under the 9000-lb load, considering the forces on the left
of it, is 7000 ⫻ 20 ⫺ 6000 ⫻ 10, or 80,000 ft-lb. (It could have been more easily
obtained by considering only the force on the right, reversing the sign convention:
8000 ⫻ 10 ⫽ 80,000 ft-lb.) Since there are no loads between the two concentrated
loads, the bending-moment diagram between the two sections is a sloping straight
line.
   If the bending moment and shear are known at any section of a beam, the
bending moment at any other section may be computed, providing there are no
unknown forces between the two sections. The rule is:
   The bending moment at any section of a beam is equal to the bending
moment at any section to the left, plus the shear at that section times the
distance between sections, minus the moments of intervening loads. If the sec-
tion with known moment and share is on the right, the sign convention must
be reversed.
   For example, the bending moment under the 9000-lb load in Fig. 5.20a could
also have been obtained from the moment under the 6000-lb load and the shear to
the right of the 6000-lb load given in the shear diagram (Fig. 5.20b). Thus,
80,000 ⫽ 70,000 ⫹ 1000 ⫻ 10. If there had been any other loads between the two
concentrated loads, the moment of these loads about the section under the 9000-lb
load would have been subtracted.
   Bending-moment diagrams for commonly encountered loading conditions are
given in Figs. 5.30 to 5.41. These may be combined to obtain bending moments
for other loads.


5.5.6   Moments in Uniformly Loaded Beams

When a bean carries a uniform load, the bending-moment diagram does not consist
of straight lines. Consider, for example, the beam in Fig. 5.21a, which carries a
uniform load over its entire length. As shown in Fig. 5.21c, the bending-moment
diagram for this beam is a parabola.
   The reactions at both ends of a simply supported, uniformly loaded beam are
both equal to wL / 2 ⫽ W / 2, where w is the uniform load in pounds per linear foot,
W ⫽ wL is the total load on the beam, and L is the span.
   The shear at any distance x from the left support is R1 wx ⫽ wL / 2 ⫺ wx (see
Fig. 5.21b). Equating this expression to zero, we find that there is no shear at the
center of the beam.
   The bending moment at any distance x from the left support is

                 M ⫽ R1 x ⫺ wx    冉冊
                                   x
                                   2
                                     ⫽
                                       wLx wx 2 w
                                        2
                                          ⫺
                                            2
                                               ⫽ x(L ⫺ x)
                                                2
                                                                                (5.51)

Hence:
    The bending moment at any section of a simply supported, uniformly loaded
beam is equal to one-half the product of the load per linear foot and the
distances to the section from both supports.
    The maximum value of the bending moment occurs at the center of the beam.
It is equal to wL2 / 8 ⫽ WL / 8.
5.36                                SECTION FIVE


5.5.7   Shear-Moment Relationship

The slope of the bending-moment curve for any point on a beam is equal to the
shear at that point; i.e.,
                                            dM
                                       V⫽                                       (5.52)
                                            dx
Since maximum bending moment occurs when the slope changes sign, or passes
through zero, maximum moment (positive or negative) occurs at the point of zero
shear.
   After integration, Eq. (5.52) may also be written

                                M1 ⫺ M2 ⫽    冕 x1

                                              x2
                                                    V dx                        (5.53)



5.5.8   Moving Loads and Influence Lines

One of the most helpful devices for solving problems involving variable or moving
loads is an influence line. Whereas shear and moment diagrams evaluate the effect
of loads at all sections of a structure, an influence line indicates the effect at a
given section of a unit load placed at any point on the structure.
    For example, to plot the influence line for bending moment at some point A on
a beam, a unit load is applied at some point B. The bending moment is A due to
the unit load at B is plotted as an ordinate to a convenient scale at B. The same
procedure is followed at every point along the beam and a curve is drawn through
the points thus obtained.
    Actually, the unit load need not be placed at every point. The equation of the
influence line can be determined by placing the load at an arbitrary point and
computing the bending moment in general terms. (See also Art. 5.10.5.)
    Suppose we wish to draw the influence line for reaction at A for a simple beam
AB (Fig. 5.22a). We place a unit load at an arbitrary distance of xL from B. The
reaction at A due to this load is 1 xL / L ⫽ x. Then, RA ⫽ x is the equation of the
influence line. It represents a straight line sloping upward from zero at B to unity
at A (Fig. 5.22a). In other words, as the unit load moves across the beam, the
reaction at A increases from zero to unity in proportion to the distance of the load
from B.
    Figure 5.22b shows the influence line for bending moment at the center of a
beam. It resembles in appearance the bending-moment diagram for a load at the
center of the beam, but its significance is entirely different. Each ordinate gives the
moment at midspan for a load at the corresponding location. It indicates that, if a
unit load is placed at a distance xL from one end, it produces a bending moment
of 1⁄2 xL at the center of the span.
    Figure 5.22c shows the influence line for shear at the quarter point of a beam.
When the load is to the right of the quarter point, the shear is positive and equal
to the left reaction. When the load is to the left, the shear is negative and equal to
the right reaction.
    The diagram indicates that, to produce maximum shear at the quarter point, loads
should be placed only to the right of the quarter point, with the largest load at the
quarter point, if possible. For a uniform load, maximum shear results when the load
extends from the right end of the beam to the quarter point.
                                   STRUCTURAL THEORY                                      5.37




 FIGURE 5.22 Influence lines for simple beam AB for (a) reaction at A; (b) midspan bending
 moment; (c) quarter-point shear; and (d ) bending moments for unit load at several points on
 the beam.



    Suppose, for example, that the beam is a crane girder with a span of 60 ft. The
wheel loads are 20 and 10 kips, respectively, and are spaced 5 ft apart. For maxi-
mum shear at the quarter point, the wheels should be placed with the 20-kip wheel
at that point and the 10-kip wheel to the right of it. The corresponding ordinates
of the influence line (Fig. 5.22c) are 3⁄4 and 40⁄45 ⫻ 3⁄4. Hence, the maximum shear
is 20 ⫻ 3⁄4 ⫹ 10 ⫻ 40⁄45 ⫻ 3⁄4 ⫽ 21.7 kips.
    Figure 5.22d shows influence lines for bending moment at several points on a
beam. It is noteworthy that the apexes of the diagrams fall on a parabola, as shown
by the dashed line. This indicates that the maximum moment produced at any given
section by a single concentrated load moving across a beam occurs when the load
is at that section. The magnitude of the maximum moment increases when the
section is moved toward midspan, in accordance with the equation shown in Fig.
5.22d for the parabola.


5.5.9   Maximum Bending Moment

When there is more than one load on the span, the influence line is useful in
developing a criterion for determining the position of the loads for which the bend-
ing moment is a maximum at a given section.
   Maximum bending moment will occur at a section C of a simple beam as loads
move across it when one of the loads is at C. The proper load to place at C is the
one for which the expression Wa / a ⫺ Wb / b (Fig. 5.23) changes sign as that load
passes from one side of C to the other.
   When several loads move across a simple beam, the maximum bending moment
produced in the beam may be near but not necessarily at midspan. To find the
maximum moment, first determine the position of the loads for maximum moment
5.38                                SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.23 .Moving loads on simple beam     FIGURE 5.24 Moving loads are placed to
AB ae placed for maximum bending moment at   subject a simple beam to the largest possible
point C on the beam.                         bending moment.




at midspan. Then shift the loads until the load P2 that was at the center of the beam
is as far from midspan as the resultant of all the loads on the span is on the other
side of midspan (Fig. 5.24). Maximum moment will occur under P2.
    When other loads move on or off the span during the shift of P2 away from
midspan, it may be necessary to investigate the moment under one of the other
loads when it and the resultant are equidistant from midspan.




5.5.10   Bending Stresses in a Beam

To derive the commonly used flexure formula for computing the bending stresses
in a beam, we have to make the following assumptions:

1. The unit stress at a point in any plane parallel to the neutral surface of a beam
   is proportional to the unit strain in the plane at the point.
2. The modulus of elasticity in tension is the same as that in compression.
3. The total and unit axial strain in any plane parallel to the neutral surface are
   both proportional to the distance of that plane from the neutral surface. (Cross
   sections that are plane before bending remain plane after bending. This requires
   that all planes have the same length before bending; thus, that the beam be
   straight.)
4. The loads act in a plane containing the centroidal axis of the beam and are
   perpendicular to that axis. Furthermore, the neutral surface is perpendicular to
   the plane of the loads. Thus, the plane of the loads must contain an axis of
   symmetry of each cross section of the beam. (The flexure formula does not apply
   to a beam loaded unsymmetrically. See Arts. 5.5.18 and 5.5.19.)
5. The beam is proportioned to preclude prior failure or serious deformation by
   torsion, local buckling, shear, or any cause other than bending.

   Equating the bending moment to the resisting moment due to the internal stresses
at any section of a beam yields
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.39


                                               ƒI
                                       M⫽                                        (5.54)
                                               C

                                             M is the bending moment at the section,
                                             ƒ is the normal unit stress in a plane at
                                             a distance c from the neutral axis (Fig.
                                             5.25), and I is the moment of inertia of
                                             the cross section with respect to the neu-
                                             tral axis. If ƒ is given in pounds per
                                             square inch (psi), I in in4, and c in
                                             inches, then M will be in inch-pounds.
                                             For maximum unit stress, c is the dis-
FIGURE 5.25 Unit stresses on a beam cross    tance to the outermost fiber. See also
section caused by bending of the beam.       Arts. 5.5.11 and 5.5.12.


5.5.11   Moment of Inertia

The neutral axis in a symmetrical beam is coincidental with the centroidal axis;
i.e., at any section the neutral axis is so located that

                                     冕 y dA ⫽ 0                                  (5.55)

where dA is a differential area parallel to the axis (Fig. 5.25), y is its distance from
the axis, and the summation is taken over the entire cross section.
   Moment of inertia with respect to the neutral axis is given by

                                     I⫽   冕y   2
                                                   dA                            (5.56)

Values of I for several common types of cross section are given in Fig. 5.26. Values
for structural-steel sections are presented in manuals of the American Institute of
Steel Construction, Chicago, Ill. When the moments of inertia of other types of
sections are needed, they can be computed directly by application of Eq. (5.56) or
by braking the section up into components for which the moment of inertia is
known.
   If I is the moment of inertia about the neutral axis, A the cross-sectional area,
and d the distance between that axis and a parallel axis in the plane of the cross
section, then the moment of inertia about the parallel axis is

                                    I ⬘ ⫽ I ⫹ Ad 2                               (5.57)

With this equation, the known moment of inertia of a component of a section about
the neutral axis of the component can be transferred to the neutral axis of the
complete section. Then, summing up the transferred moments of inertia for all the
components yields the moment of inertia of the complete section.
   When the moments of inertia of an area with respect to any two perpendicular
axes are known, the moment of inertia with respect to any other axis passing
through the point of intersection of the two axes may be obtained through the use
5.40                                  SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.26 Geometric properties of various cross sections.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.41


of Mohr’s circle, as for stresses (Fig. 5.10). In this analog, Ix corresponds with ƒx,
Iy with ƒy , and the product of inertia Ixy with vxy (Art. 5.3.6).

                                     Ixy ⫽   冕 xy dA                             (5.58)

   The two perpendicular axes through a point about which the moments of inertia
are a maximum and a minimum are called the principal axes. The products of
inertia are zero for the principal axes.


5.5.12     Section Modulus

The ratio S ⫽ I / c in Eq. (5.54) is called the section modulus. I is the moment of
inertia of the cross section about the neutral axis and c the distance from the neutral
axis to the outermost fiber. Values of S for common types of sections are given in
Fig. 5.26.
                                               5.5.13   Shearing Stresses in a
                                                        Beam

                                               The vertical shear at any section of a
                                               beam is resisted by nonuniformly dis-
                                               tributed, vertical unit stresses (Fig.
                                               5.27). At every point in the section,
                                               there is also a horizontal unit stress,
                                               which is equal in magnitude to the ver-
                                               tical unit shearing stress there [see Eq.
                                               (5.34)].
FIGURE 5.27 Unit shearing stresses on a            At any distances y ⬘ from the neutral
beam cross section.                            axis, both the horizontal and vertical
                                               shearing unit stresses are equal to
                                             V
                                      v⫽        A⬘ y                             (5.59)
                                             It
where V    ⫽ vertical shear at the cross section
       t   ⫽ thickness of beam at distance y ⬘ from neutral axis
      I    ⫽ moment of inertia about neutral axis
     A⬘    ⫽ area between the outermost fiber and the fiber for which the shearing
             stress is being computed
         y ⫽ distance of center of gravity of this area from the neutral axis (Fig.
             5.27)
   For a rectangular beam with width b and depth d, the maximum shearing stress
occurs at middepth. Its magnitude is
                                     12V bd 2 3 V
                                v⫽           ⫽
                                     bd 3b 8   2 bd
That is, the maximum shear stress is 50% greater than the average shear stress on
the section. Similarly, for a circular beam, the maximum is one-third greater than
the average. For an I beam, however, the maximum shearing stress in the web is
5.42                                  SECTION FIVE


not appreciably greater than the average for the web section alone, if it is assumed
that the flanges take no shear.


5.5.14   Combined Shear and Bending Stress

For deep beams on short spans and beams made of low-strength materials, it is
sometimes necessary to determine the maximum stress ƒ ⬘ on an inclined plane
caused by a combination of shear and bending stress—v and ƒ, respectively. This
stress ƒ ⬘, which may be either tension or compression, is greater than the normal
stress. Its value may be obtained by application of Mohr’s circle (Art. 5.3.6), as
indicated in Fig. 5.10, but with ƒy ⫽ 0, and is


                                            冪 冉冊
                                                           2
                                      ƒ               ƒ
                               ƒ⬘ ⫽     ⫹    v2 ⫹                               (5.60)
                                      2               2


5.5.15   Beam Deflections

When a beam is loaded, it deflects. The new position of its longitudinal centroidal
axis is called the elastic curve.
   At any point of the elastic curve, the radius of curvature is given by
                                             EI
                                        R⫽                                      (5.61)
                                             M
where M ⫽ bending moment at the point
      E ⫽ modulus of elasticity
       I ⫽ moment of inertia of the cross section about the neutral axis
   Since the slope dy / dx of the curve is small, its square may be neglected, so that,
for all practical purposes, 1 /R may be taken equal to d 2y / dx 2, where y is the
deflection of a point on the curve at a distance x from the origin of coordinates.
Hence, Eq. (5.61) may be rewritten
                                               d 2y
                                      M ⫽ EI                                    (5.62)
                                               dx 2
To obtain the slope and deflection of a beam, this equation may be integrated, with
M expressed as a function of x. Constants introduced during the integration must
be evaluated in terms of known points and slopes of the elastic curve.
   Equation (5.62), in turn, may be rewritten after one integration as

                                ␪ B ⫺ ␪A ⫽   冕 B

                                               A
                                                   M
                                                   EI
                                                      dx                        (5.63)

in which ␪A and ␪B are the slopes of the elastic curve at any two points A and B.
If the slope is zero at one of the points, the integral in Eq. (5.63) gives the slope
of the elastic curve at the other. It should be noted that the integral represents the
area of the bending-moment diagram between A and B with each ordinate divided
by EI.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.43


   The tangential deviation t of a point on the elastic curve is the distance of this
point, measured in a direction perpendicular to the original position of the beam,
from a tangent drawn at some other point on the elastic curve.

                                tB ⫺ tA ⫽   冕B

                                             A
                                                 Mx
                                                 EI
                                                    dx                         (5.64)

    Equation (5.64) indicates that the tangential deviation of any point with respect
to a second point on the elastic curve equals the moment about the first point of
the M / EI diagram between the two points. The moment-area method for deter-
mining the deflection of beams is a technique in which Eqs. (5.63) and (5.64) are
utilized.
    Suppose, for example, the deflection at midspan is to be computed for a beam
of uniform cross section with a concentrated load at the center (Fig. 5.28).
    Since the deflection at midspan for this loading is the maximum for the span,
the slope of the elastic curve at the center of the beam is zero; i.e., the tangent is
parallel to the undeflected position of the beam. Hence, the deviation of either
support from the midspan tangent is equal to the deflection at the center of the
beam. Then, by the moment-area theorem [Eq. (5.64)], the deflection yc is given
by the moment about either support of the area of the M / EI diagram included
between an ordinate at the center of the beam and that support.
                                    1 PL L 2 L   PL3
                             yc ⫽              ⫽
                                    2 4EI 2 3 2 48EI
   Suppose now, the deflection y at any point D at a distance xL from the left
support (Fig. 5.28) is to be determined. Referring to the sketch, we note that the
distance DE from the undeflected point of D to the tangent to the elastic curve at
support A is given by




                      FIGURE 5.28 Load and M / EI diagrams and
                      elastic curve for a simple beam with mispan
                      load.
5.44                                 SECTION FIVE


                                    y ⫹ tAD ⫽ xtAB

where tAD is the tangential deviation of D from the tangent at A and tAB is the
tangential deviation of B from that tangent. This equation, which is perfectly general
for the deflection of any point of a simple beam, no matter how loaded, may be
rewritten to give the deflection directly:
                                    y ⫽ xtAB ⫺ tAD                               (5.65)

But tAB is the moment of the area of the M / EI diagram for the whole beam about
support B. And tAD is the moment about D of the area of the M / EI diagram included
between ordinates at A and D. Hence

           y⫽x            冉 冊
                 1 PL L 2 1
                          ⫹
                 2 4EI 2 3 3
                             L⫺
                                1 PLx
                                2 2EI
                                      xL
                                         xL
                                          3
                                            ⫽
                                              PL3
                                              48EI
                                                   x(3 ⫺ 4x 2)

   It is also noteworthy that, since the tangential deviations are very small distances,
the slope of the elastic curve at A is given by

                                              tAB
                                       ␪A ⫽                                      (5.66)
                                               L

This holds, in general, for all simple beams regardless of the type of loading.
   The procedure followed in applying Eq. (5.65) to the deflection of the loaded
beam in Fig. 5.28 is equivalent to finding the bending moment at D with the M /
EI diagram serving as the load diagram. The technique of applying the M / EI dia-
gram as a load and determining the deflection as a bending moment is known as
the conjugate-beam method.
   The conjugate beam must have the same length as the given beam; it must be
in equilibrium with the M / EI load and the reactions produced by the load; and the
bending moment at any section must be equal to the deflection of the given beam
at the corresponding section. The last requirement is equivalent to requiring that
the shear at any section of the conjugate beam with the M / EI load be equal to the
slope of the elastic curve at the corresponding section of the given beam. Figure
5.29 shows the conjugates for various types of beams.
   Deflections for several types of loading on simple beams are given in Figs. 5.30
to 5.35 and for overhanging beams and cantilevers in Figs. 5.36 to 5.41.
   When a beam carries a number of loads of different types, the most convenient
method of computing its deflection generally is to find the deflections separately
for the uniform and concentrated loads and add them up.
   For several concentrated loads, the easiest solution is to apply the reciprocal
theorem (Art. 5.10.5). According to this theorem, if a concentrated load is applied
to a beam at a point A, the deflection it produces at point B is equal to the deflection
at A for the same load applied at B(dAB ⫽ dBA).
   Suppose, for example, the midspan deflection is to be computed. Then, assume
each load in turn applied at the center of the beam and compute the deflection at
the point where it originally was applied from the equation of the elastic curve
given in Fig. 5.33. The sum of these deflections is the total midspan deflection.
   Another method for computing deflections of beams is presented in Art. 5.10.4.
This method may also be applied to determining the deflection of a beam due to
shear.
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.45




          FIGURE 5.29 Various types of beams and corresponding conjugate beams.



5.5.16    Combined Axial and Bending Loads

For stiff beams, subjected to both transverse and axial loading, the stresses are
given by the principle of superposition if the deflection due to bending may be
neglected without serious error. That is, the total stress is given with sufficient
accuracy at any section by the sum of the axial stress and the bending stresses. The
maximum stress equals
                                          P Mc
                                     ƒ⫽     ⫹                                     (5.67)
                                          A   I
where P   ⫽  axial load
      A   ⫽  cross-sectional area
     M    ⫽  maximum bending moment
      c   ⫽  distance from neutral axis to outermost surface at the section where
             maximum moment occurs
         I ⫽ moment of inertia of cross section about neutral axis at that section
5.46                                SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.30 Uniform load over the whole     FIGURE 5.31 Uniform load over only part of
span of a simple beam.                      a simple beam.


    When the deflection due to bending is large and the axial load produces bending
stresses that cannot be neglected, the maximum stress is given by
                                    P             c
                               ƒ⫽     ⫹ (M ⫹ Pd )                              (5.68)
                                    A             I
where d is the deflection of the beam. For axial compression, the moment Pd should
be given the same sign as M, and for tension, the opposite sign, but the minimum
value of M ⫹ Pd is zero. The deflection d for axial compression and bending can
be obtained by applying Eq. (5.62). (S. Timoshenko and J. M. Gere, ‘‘Theory of
Elastic Stability,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing company, New York; Friedrich Bleich,
‘‘Buckling Strength of Metal Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New
York.) However, it may be closely approximated by
                                           do
                                  d⫽                                           (5.69)
                                       1 ⫺ (P / Pc)
where do ⫽ deflection for the transverse loading alone
      Pc ⫽ the critical buckling load ␲ 2EI / L2 (see Art. 5.7.2)


5.5.17   Eccentric Loading

An eccentric longitudinal load in the plane of symmetry produces a bending mo-
ment Pe where e is the distance of the load from the centroidal axis. The total unit
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.47




FIGURE 5.32 Concentrated load at any point   FIGURE 5.33 Concentrated load at midspan
of a simple beam.                            of a simple beam.




stress is the sum of the stress due to this moment and the stress due to P applied
as an axial load:


                            ƒ⫽
                                 P
                                 A
                                   
                                     Pec P
                                      I
                                        ⫽
                                          A
                                              ec
                                            1 2
                                              r 冉        冊                      (5.70)


where A   ⫽   cross-sectional area
      c   ⫽   distance from neutral axis to outermost fiber
      I   ⫽   moment of inertia of cross section about neutral axis
      r   ⫽   radius of gyration, which is equal to 兹I/ A

Figure 5.26 gives values of the radius of gyration for some commonly used cross
sections.
   For an axial compression load, if there is to be no tension on the cross section,
e should not exceed r2 / c. For a rectangular section with width b and depth d, the
eccentricity, therefore, should be less than b / 6 and d / 6; i.e., the load should not
be applied outside the middle third. For a circular cross section with diameter D,
the eccentricity should not exceed D / 8.
   When the eccentric longitudinal load produces a deflection too large to be ne-
glected in computing the bending stress, account must be taken of the additional
bending moment Pd, where d is the deflection. This deflection may be computed
by employing Eq. (5.62) or closely approximated by
5.48                                  SECTION FIVE




                         FIGURE 5.34 Two equal concentrated
                         loads on a simple beam.



                                           4eP / Pc
                                   d⫽                                         (5.71)
                                        ␲ (1 ⫺ P / Pc)
Pc is the critical buckling load ␲ 2EI / L2 (see Art. 5.7.2).
    If the load P does not lie in a plane containing an axis of symmetry, it produces
bending about the two principal axes through the centroid of the cross section. The
stresses are given by
                                     P  Pe c  Peycy
                                ƒ⫽      x x                                 (5.72)
                                     A   Iy    Ix
where A    ⫽   cross-sectional area
      ex   ⫽   eccentricity with respect to principal axis YY
      ey   ⫽   eccentricity with respect to principal axis XX
      cx   ⫽   distance from YY to outermost fiber
      cy   ⫽   distance from XX to outermost fiber
      Ix   ⫽   moment of inertia about XX
      Iy   ⫽   moment of inertia about YY
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.49




                    FIGURE 5.35 Several equal concentrated loads
                    on a simple beam.




The principal axes are the two perpendicular axes through the centroid for which
the moments of inertia are a maximum or a minimum and for which the products
of inertia are zero.



5.5.18   Unsymmetrical Bending

Bending caused by loads that do not lie in a plane containing a principal axis of
each cross section of a beam is called unsymmetrical bending. If the bending axis
of the beam lies in the plane of the loads, to preclude torsion (see Art. 5.4.1), and
if the loads are perpendicular to the bending axis, to preclude axial components,
the stress at any point in a cross section is given by

                                      Mx y   My x
                                 ƒ⫽                                          (5.73)
                                       Ix     Iy
5.50                  SECTION FIVE




       FIGURE 5.36 Concentrated load at the end of a
       beam overhang.




         FIGURE 5.37 Concentrated load at the end
         of a cantilever.
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                             5.51




                    FIGURE 5.38 Uniform load over the full length of a
                    beam with overhang.



where Mx    ⫽   bending moment about principal axis XX
      My    ⫽   bending moment about principal axis YY
        x   ⫽   distance from point for which stress is to be computed to YY axis
        y   ⫽   distance from point to XX axis
       Ix   ⫽   moment of inertia of the cross section about XX
       Iy   ⫽   moment of inertia about YY
   If the plane of the loads makes an angle ␪ with a principal plane, the neutral
surface will form an angle ␣ with the other principal plane such that
                                              Ix
                                    tan ␣ ⫽      tan ␪                        (5.74)
                                              Iy


5.5.19   Beams with Unsymmetrical Sections

In the derivation of the flexure formula ƒ ⫽ Mc / I [Eq. (5.54)], the assumption is
made that the beam bends, without twisting, in the plane of the loads and that the
neutral surface is perpendicular to the plane of the loads. These assumptions are
correct for beams with cross sections symmetrical about two axes when the plane
of the loads contains one of these axes. They are not necessarily true for beams
that are not doubly symmetrical. The reason is that in beams that are doubly sym-
5.52                               SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.39 Uniform load over the whole     FIGURE 5.40 Uniform load on a beam over-
length of a cantilever.                     hang.


metrical the bending axis coincides with the centroidal axis, whereas in unsym-
metrical sections the two axes may be separate. In the latter case, if the plane of
the loads contains the centroidal axis but not the bending axis, the beam will be
subjected to both bending and torsion.
   The bending axis may be defined as the longitudinal line in a beam through
which transverse loads must pass to preclude the beam’s twisting as it bends. The
point in each section through which the bending axis passes is called the shear
center, or center of twist. The shear center is also the center of rotation of the
section in pure torsion (Art. 5.4.1).
   Computation of stresses and strains in members subjected to both bending and
torsion is complicated, because warping of the cross section and buckling effects
should be taken into account. Preferably, twisting should be prevented by use of
bracing or avoided by selecting appropriate shapes for the members and by locating
and directing loads to pass through the bending axis.
   (F. Bleich, ‘‘Blucking Strength of Metal Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing
Company, New York.)


5.6    CURVED BEAMS

Structural members, such as arches, crane hooks, chain links, and frames of some
machines, that have considerable initial curvature in the plane of loading are called
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.53




                       FIGURE 5.41 Triangular loading on a can-
                       tilever.




curved beams. The flexure formula of Art. 5.5.10, ƒ ⫽ Mc / I, cannot be applied to
them with any reasonable degree of accuracy unless the depth of the beam is small
compared with the radius of curvature.
   Unlike the condition in straight beams, unit strains in curved beams are not
proportional to the distance from the neutral surface, and the centroidal axis does
not coincide with the neutral axis. Hence the stress distribution on a section is not
linear but more like the distribution shown in Fig. 5.42c.



5.6.1   Stresses in Curved Beams

Just as for straight beams, the assumption that plane sections before bending remain
plane after bending generally holds for curved beams. So the total strains are pro-
portional to the distance from the neutral axis. But since the fibers are initially of
unequal length, the unit strains are a more complex function of this distance. In
Fig. 5.42a, for example, the bending couples have rotated section AB of the curved
beam into section A⬘B⬘ through an angle ⌬d␪. If ⑀o is the unit strain at the centroidal
axis and ␻ is the angular unit strain ⌬d␪ / d␪, then the unit strain at a distance y
from the centroidal axis (measured positive in the direction of the center of cur-
vature) is
5.54                                   SECTION FIVE




 FIGURE 5.42 Bending stresses in a curved beam.



                    DD⬘ ⑀oR d␪ ⫺ y⌬d␪                  y
               ⑀⫽       ⫽             ⫽ ⑀o ⫺ (␻ ⫺ ⑀o)                         (5.75)
                    DDo   (R ⫺ y) d␪                  R⫺y

where R ⫽ radius of curvature of centroidal axis.
   Equation (5.75) can be expressed in terms of the bending moment if we take
advantage of the fact that the sum of the tensile and compressive forces on the
section must be zero and the moment of these forces must be equal to the bending
moment M. These two equations yield

                   ⑀o ⫽
                           M
                          ARE
                                      and          ␻⫽
                                                         M
                                                        ARE 冉
                                                            1⫹
                                                               AR2
                                                                I⬘   冊        (5.76)

where A is the cross-sectional area, E the modulus of elasticity, and

                 I⬘ ⫽   冕 1 y⫺ dAy / R ⫽ 冕 y
                             2
                                               2
                                                   冉
                                                   1⫹
                                                        y
                                                          ⫹
                                                        R R2
                                                            y2
                                                                    冊
                                                               ⫹    dA     (5.77)

It should be noted that I ⬘ is very nearly equal to the moment of inertia I about the
centroidal axis when the depth of the section is small compared with R, so that the
maximum ratio of y to R is small compared with unity. M is positive when it
decreases the radius of curvature.
    Since the stress ƒ ⫽ E⑀, we obtain the stresses in the curved beam from Eq.
(5.75) by multiplying it by E and substituting ⑀o and ␻ from Eq. (5.76):

                                      M    My    1
                                 ƒ⫽      ⫺                                    (5.78)
                                      AR   I⬘ 1 ⫺ y/R

   The distance yo of the neutral axis from the centroidal axis (Fig. 5.42) may be
obtained from Eq. (5.78) by setting ƒ ⫽ 0:
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.55


                                                 I ⬘R
                                      yo ⫽                                        (5.79)
                                             I ⬘ ⫹ AR2
Since yo is positive, the neutral axis shifts toward the center of curvature.


5.6.2   Curved Beams with Various Cross Sections
Equation (5.78) for bending stresses in curved beams subjected to end moments in
the plane of curvature can be expressed for the inside and outside beam faces in
the form:
                                                  Mc
                                       ƒ⫽K                                        (5.80)
                                                   I
where c ⫽ distance from the centroidal axis to the inner or outer surface. Table 5.4
gives values of K calculated from Eq. (5.78) for circular, elliptical, and rectangular
cross sections.
    If Eq. (5.78) is applied to 1 or T beams or tubular members, it may indicate
circumferential flange stresses that are much lower than will actually occur. The
error is due to the fact that the outer edges of the flanges deflect radially. The effect
is equivalent to having only part of the flanges active in resisting bending stresses.
Also, accompanying the flange deflections, there are transverse bending stresses in
the flanges. At the junction with the web, these reach a maximum, which may be
greater than the maximum circumferential stress. Furthermore, there are radial
stresses (normal stresses acting in the direction of the radius of curvature) in the
web that also may have maximum values greater than the maximum circumferential
stress.
    A good approximation to the stresses in I or T beams is as follows: for circum-
ferential stresses, Eq. (5.78) may be used with a modified cross section, which is
obtained by using a reduced flange width. The reduction is calculated from b⬘ ⫽
␣b, where b is the length of the portion of the flange projecting on either side from
the web, b⬘ is the corrected length, and ␣ is a correction factor determined from
equations developed by H. Bleich, ␣ is a function of b2 / rt, where t is the flange
thickness and r the radius of the center of the flange:



               b2 / rt ⫽ 0.5    0.7    1.0       1.5   2   3     4    5
                    ␣ ⫽ 0.9     0.6    0.7       0.6   0.5 0.4   0.37 0.33


    When the parameter b2 / rt is greater than 1.0, the maximum transverse bending
stress is approximately equal to 1.7 times the stress obtained at the center of the
flange from Eq. (5.78) applied to the modified section. When the parameter equals
0.7, that stress should be multiplied by 1.5, and when it equals 0.4, the factor is
1.0 in Eq. (5.78), I ⬘ for I beams may be taken for this calculation approximately
equal to

                                   I⬘ ⫽ I 1 ⫹冉          冊
                                                       c2
                                                       R2
                                                                                  (5.81)
5.56                                 SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.4 Values of K for Curved Beams

                                R                          K
        Section                 c            Inside face       Outside face     yo
                               1.2              3.41              0.54        0.224R
                               1.4              2.40              0.60        0.141R
                               1.6              1.96              0.65        0.108R
                               1.8              1.75              0.68        0.0847R
                               2.0              1.62              0.71        0.069R
                               3.0              1.33              0.79        0.030R
                               4.0              1.23              0.84        0.016R
                               6.0              1.14              0.89        0.0070R
                               8.0              1.10              0.91        0.0039R
                              10.0              1.08              0.93        0.0025R
                               1.2              3.28              0.58        0.269R
                               1.4              2.31              0.64        0.182R
                               1.6              1.89              0.68        0.134R
                               1.8              1.70              0.71        0.104R
                               2.0              1.57              0.73        0.083R
                               3.0              1.31              0.81        0.038R
                               4.0              1.21              0.85        0.020R
                               6.0              1.13              0.90        0.0087R
                               8.0              1.10              0.92        0.0049R
                              10.0              1.07              0.93        0.0031R
                               1.2              2.89              0.57        0.305R
                               1.4              2.13              0.63        0.204R
                               1.6              1.79              0.67        0.149R
                               1.8              1.63              0.70        0.112R
                               2.0              1.52              0.73        0.090R
                               3.0              1.30              0.81        0.041R
                               4.0              1.20              0.85        0.0217R
                               6.0              1.12              0.90        0.0093R
                               8.0              1.09              0.92        0.0052R
                              10.0              1.07              0.94        0.0033R




where I ⫽ moment of inertia of modified section about its centroidal axis
     R ⫽ radius of curvature of centroidal axis
      c ⫽ distance from centroidal axis to center of the more sharply curved flange

Because of the high stress factor, it is advisable to stiffen or brace curved I-beam
flanges.
    The maximum radial stress will occur at the junction of web and flange of I
beams. If the moment is negative, that is, if the loads tend to flatten out the beam,
the radial stress is tensile, and there is a tendency for the more sharply curved
flange to pull away from the web. An approximate value of this maximum stress
is

                                             Aƒ M
                                    ƒr ⫽ ⫺                                     (5.82)
                                             A tw cgr⬘
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.57


where ƒr   ⫽   radial stress at junction of flange and web of a symmetrical I beam
     Aƒ    ⫽   area of one flange
      A    ⫽   total cross-sectional area
      M    ⫽   bending moment
      tw   ⫽   thickness of web
      cg   ⫽   distance from centroidal axis to center of flange
      r⬘   ⫽   radius of curvature of inner face of more sharply curved flange
(A. P. Boresi, O. Sidebottom, F. B. Seely, and J. O. Smith, ‘‘Advanced Mechanics
of Materials,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.)


5.6.3   Axial and Bending Loads on Curved Beams

If a curved beam carries an axial load P as well as bending loads, the maximum
unit stress is
                                         P   Mc
                                   ƒ⫽          K                             (5.83)
                                         A    I
where K is a correction factor for the curvature [see Eq. (5.80)]. The sign of M is
taken positive in this equation when it increases the curvature, and P is positive
when it is a tensile force, negative when compressive.


5.6.4   Slope and Deflection of Curved Beams

If we consider two sections of a curved beam separated by a differential distance
ds (Fig. 5.42), the change in angle ⌬d␪ between the sections caused by a bending
moment M and an axial load P may be obtained from Eq. (5.76), noting that d␪ ⫽
ds / R.

                           ⌬d␪ ⫽
                                   M ds
                                   EI ⬘  冉
                                        1⫹
                                            I⬘
                                           AR 2
                                                ⫹   冊
                                                  P ds
                                                  ARE
                                                                              (5.84)

where E is the modulus of elasticity, A the cross-sectional area, R the radius of
curvature of the centroidal axis, and I ⬘ is defined by Eq. (5.77).
   If P is a tensile force, the length of the centroidal axis increases by
                                         P ds M ds
                                 ⌬ds ⫽       ⫹                                (5.85)
                                         AE    ARE
The effect of curvature on shearing deformations for most practical applications is
negligible.
   For shallow sections (depth of section less than about one-tenth the span), the
effect of axial forces on deformations may be neglected. Also, unless the radius of
curvature is very small compared with the depth, the effect of curvature may be
ignored. Hence, for most practical applications, Eq. (5.84) may be used in the
simplified form:
                                             M ds
                                     ⌬d␪ ⫽                                    (5.86)
                                              EI
For deeper beams, the action of axial forces, as well as bending moments, should
5.58                               SECTION FIVE


be taken into account; but unless the curvature is sharp, its effect on deformations
may be neglected. So only Eq. (5.86) and the first term in Eq. (5.85) need be used.
(S. Timoshenko and D. H. Young, ‘‘Theory of Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing
Company, New York.) See also Arts. 5.14.1 to 5.14.3.


5.7    BUCKLING OF COLUMNS

Columns are compression members whose cross-sectional dimensions are relatively
small compared with their length in the direction of the compressive force. Failure
of such members occurs because of instability when a certain axial load Pc (called
critical or Euler load) is equated or exceeded. The member may bend, or buckle,
suddenly and collapse.
    Hence the strength P of a column is not determined by the unit stress in Eq.
(5.21) (P ⫽ Aƒ ) but by the maximum load it can carry without becoming unstable.
The condition of instability is characterized by disproportionately large increases
in lateral deformation with slight increase in axial load. Instability may occur in
slender columns before the unit stress reaches the elastic limit.


                                            5.7.1     Stable Equilibrium

                                            Consider, for example, an axially loaded
                                            column with ends unrestrained against
                                            rotation, shown in Fig. 5.43. If the mem-
                                            ber is initially perfectly straight, it will
                                            remain straight as long as the load P is
                                            less than the critical load Pc. If a small
                                            transverse force is applied, the column
                                            will deflect, but it will return to the
                                            straight position when this force is re-
                                            moved. Thus, when P is less than Pc,
                                            internal and external forces are in stable
                                            equilibrium.


                                            5.7.2     Unstable Equilibrium

                                           If P ⫽ Pc and a small transverse force
FIGURE 5.43 Buckling of a pin-ended long   is applied, the column again will deflect,
column.                                    but this time, when the force is re-
                                           moved, the column will remain in the
                                           bent position (dashed line in Fig. 5.43).
The equation of this elastic curve can be obtained from Eq. (5.62):
                                       d 2y
                                  EI        ⫽ ⫺Pc y                              (5.87)
                                       dx 2
in which E ⫽ modulus of elasticity
         I ⫽ least moment of inertia
         y ⫽ deflection of the bent member from the straight position at a distance
             x from one end
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                                    5.59


This assumes, of course, that the stresses are within the elastic limit. Solution of
Eq. (5.87) gives the smallest value of the Euler load as

                                               ␲ 2EI
                                        Pc ⫽                                         (5.88)
                                                L2

Equation (5.88) indicates that there is a definite finite magnitude of an axial load
that will hold a column in equilibrium in the bent position when the stresses are
below the elastic limit. Repeated application and removal of small transverse forces
or small increases in axial load above this critical load will cause the member to
fail by buckling. Internal and external forces are in a state of unstable equilibrium.
    It is noteworthy that the Euler load, which determines the load-carrying capacity
of a column, depends on the stiffness of the member, as expressed by the modulus
of elasticity, rather than on the strength of the material of which it is made.
    By dividing both sides of Eq. (5.88) by the cross-sectional area A and substi-
tuting r 2 for I / A (r is the radius of gyration of the section), we can write the solution
of Eq. (5.87) in terms of the average unit stress on the cross section:

                                       Pc    ␲ 2E
                                          ⫽                                          (5.89)
                                       A    (L / r)2

This holds only for the elastic range of buckling; i.e. for values of the slenderness
ratio L / r above a certain limiting value that depends on the properties of the ma-
terial. For inelastic buckling, see Art. 5.7.4.



5.7.3   Effect of End Conditions

Equation (5.89) was derived on the assumption that the ends of the column are free
to rotate. It can be generalized, however, to take into account the effect of end
conditions:

                                      Pc     ␲ 2E
                                         ⫽                                           (5.90)
                                      A    (kL / r)2

where k is the factor that depends on the end conditions. For a pin-ended column,
k ⫽ 1; for a column with both ends fixed, k ⫽ 1⁄2; for a column with one end fixed
and one end pinned, k is about 0.7; and for a column with one end fixed and one
end free from all restraint, k ⫽ 2.



5.7.4   Inelastic Buckling

Equations (5.88) and (5.90) are derived from Eq. (5.87), the differential equation
for the elastic curve. They are based on the assumption that the critical average
stress is below the elastic limit when the state of unstable equilibrium is reached.
In members with slenderness ratio L / r below a certain limiting value, however, the
elastic limit is exceeded before the column buckles. As the axial load approaches
the critical load, the modulus of elasticity varies with the stress. Hence Eqs. (5.88)
and (5.90), based on the assumption that E is a constant, do not hold for these short
columns.
5.60                                      SECTION FIVE


  After extensive testing and analysis, prevalent engineering opinion favors the
Engesser equation for metals in the inelastic range:
                                          Pt    ␲ 2Et
                                             ⫽                                               (5.91)
                                          A    (kL / r)2
This differs from Eqs. (5.88) to (5.90) only in that the tangent modulus Et (the
actual slope of the stress-strain curve for the stress Pt / A) replaced the modulus of
elasticity E in the elastic range. Pt is the smallest axial load for which two equilib-
rium positions are possible, the straight position and a deflected position.


5.7.5   Column Curves

Curves obtained by plotting the critical stress for various values of the slenderness
ratio are called column curves. For axially loaded, initially straight columns, the
column curve consists of two parts: (1) the Euler critical values, and (2) the En-
gesser, or tangent-modulus critical values.
    The latter are greatly affected by the shape of the stress-strain curve for the
material of which the column is made, as shown in Fig. 5.44. The stress-strain
curve for a material, such as an aluminum alloy or high-strength steel, which does
not have a sharply defined yield point, is shown in Fig. 5.44a. The corresponding




FIGURE 5.44 Column curves: (a) stress-strain curve for a material that does not have a sharply
defined yield pont: (b) column curve for this material; (c) stress-strain curve for a material with a
sharply defined yield point; (d ) column curve for that material.
                               STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.61


column curve is drawn in Fig. 5.44b. In contrast, Fig. 5.44c presents the stress-
strain curve for structural steel, with a sharply defined point, and Fig. 5.44d the
related column curve. This curve becomes horizontal as the critical stress ap-
proaches the yield strength of the material and the tangent modulus becomes zero,
whereas the column curve in Fig. 5.44b continues to rise with decreasing values of
the slenderness ratio.
    Examination of Fig. 44d also indicates that slender columns, which fall in the
elastic range, where the column curve has a large slope, are very sensitive to var-
iations in the factor k, which represents the effect of end conditions. On the other
hand, in the inelastic range, where the column curve is relatively flat, the critical
stress is relatively insensitive to changes in k. Hence the effect of end conditions
on the stability of a column is of much greater significance for long columns than
for short columns.


5.7.6   Local Buckling

A column may not only fail by buckling of the member as a whole but as an
alternative, by buckling of one of its components. Hence, when members like I
beams, channels, and angles are used as columns or when sections are built up of
plates, the possibility of the critical load on a component (leg, half flange, web,
lattice bar) being less than the critical load on the column as a whole should be
investigated.
    Similarly, the possibility of buckling of the compression flange or the web of a
beam should be looked into.
    Local buckling, however, does not always result in a reduction in the load-
carrying capacity of a column. Sometimes, it results in a redistribution of the
stresses enabling the member to carry additional load.


5.7.7   Behavior of Actual Columns

For many reasons, columns in structures behave differently from the ideal column
assumed in deriving Eqs. (5.88) and (5.91). A major consideration is the effect of
accidental imperfections, such as nonhomogeneity of materials, initial crookedness,
and unintentional eccentricities of the axial load, since neither field nor shopwork
can be perfect. These and the effects of residual stresses usually are taken into
account by a proper choice of safety factor.
    There are other significant conditions, however, that must be considered in any
design rule: continuity in frame structures and eccentricity of the axial load. Con-
tinuity affects column action in two ways. The restraint at column ends determines
the value of k, and bending moments are transmitted to the column by adjoining
structural members.
    Because of the deviation of the behavior of actual columns from the ideal,
columns generally are designed by empirical formulas. Separate equations usually
are given for short columns, intermediate columns, and long columns. For specific
materials—steel, concrete, timber—these formulas are given in Secs. 7 to 10.
    For more details on column action, see F. Bleich, ‘‘Buckling Strength of Metal
Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York, 1952: S. Timoshenko
and J. M. Gere, ‘‘Theory of Elastic Stability,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Company,
New York, 1961; and T. V. Galambos, ‘‘Guide to Stability Design Criteria for Metal
Structures,’’ 4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Somerset, N.J., 1988.
5.62                                 SECTION FIVE


5.8     GRAPHIC-STATICS FUNDAMENTALS

A force may be represented by a straight line of fixed length. The length of line to
a given scale represents the magnitude of the force. The position of the line parallels
the line of action of the force. And an arrowhead on the line indicates the direction
in which the force acts.
   Forces are concurrent when their lines of action meet. If they lie in the same
plane, they are coplanar.


5.8.1   Parallelogram of Forces

The resultant of several forces is a single forces that would produce the same effect
on a rigid body. The resultant of two concurrent forces is determined by the par-
allelogram law:
    If a parallelogram is constructed with two forces as sides, the diagonal represents
the resultant of the forces (Fig. 5.45a).
    The resultant is said to be equal to the sum of the forces, sum here meaning,
of course, addition by the parallelogram law. Subtraction is carried out in the same
manner as addition, but the direction of the force to be subtracted is reversed.
    If the direction of the resultant is reversed, it becomes the equilibrant, a single
force that will hold the two given forces in equilibrium.


5.8.2   Resolution of Forces

To resolve a force into two components, a parallelogram is drawn with the force
as a diagonal. The sides of the parallelogram represent the components. The pro-
cedure is: (1) Draw the given force. (2) From both ends of the force draw lines
parallel to the directions in which the components act. (3) Draw the components
along the parallels through the origin of the given force to the intersections with
the parallels through the other end. Thus, in Fig. 5.45a, P1 and P2 are the com-
ponents in directions OA and OB of the force represented by OC.


5.8.3   Force Polygons

Examination of Fig. 5.45a indicates that a step can be saved in adding the two
forces. The same resultant could be obtained by drawing only the upper half of the
parallelogram. Hence, to add two forces, draw the first force; then draw the second




          FIGURE 5.45 Addition of forces by (a) parallelogram law; (b) triangle
          construction; (c) polygon construction.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.63


force beginning at the end of the first one. The resultant is the force drawn from
the origin of the first force to the end of the second force, as shown in Fig. 5.45b.
Again, the equilibrant is the resultant with direction reversed.
   From this diagram, an important conclusion can be drawn: If three forces meet-
ing at a point are in equilibrium, they will form a closed force triangle.
   The conclusions reached for addition of two forces can be generalized for several
concurrent forces: To add several forces, P1, P2, P3, . . . , Pn, draw P2 from the end
of P1, P3 from the end of P2, etc. The force required to close the force polygon is
the resultant (Fig. 5.45c).
   If a group of concurrent forces are in equilibrium, they will form a closed
force polygon.


5.9     ROOF TRUSSES

A truss is a coplanar system of structural members joined together at their ends to
form a stable framework. If small changes in the lengths of the members due to
loads are neglected, the relative positions of the joints cannot change.


5.9.1   Characteristics of Trusses

Three bars pinned together to form a triangle represents the simplest type of truss.
Some of the more common types of roof trusses are shown in Fig. 6.46.
    The top members are called the upper chord; the bottom members, the lower
chord; and the verticals and diagonals web members.
    The purpose of roof trusses is to act like big beams, to support the roof covering
over long spans. They not only have to carry their own weight and the weight of
the roofing and roof beams, or purlins, but cranes, wind loads, snow loads, sus-
pended ceilings, and equipment, and a live load to take care of construction, main-
tenance, and repair loading. These loads are applied at the intersection of the mem-
bers, or panel points, so that the members will be subjected principally to axial
stresses—tension or compression.
    Methods of computing stresses in trusses are presented in Arts. 5.9.3 and 5.9.4.
A method of computing truss deflections is described in Art. 5.10.4.


5.9.2   Bow’s Notation

For simple designation of loads and stresses, capital letters are placed in the spaces
between truss members and between forces. Each member and load is then desig-
nated by the letters on opposite sides of it. For example, in Fig. 5.47a, the upper
chord members are AF, BH, CJ, and DL. The loads are AB, BC, and CD, and the
reactions are EA and DE. Stresses in the members generally are designated by the
same letters but in lowercase.


5.9.3   Method of Joints

A useful method for determining the stresses in truss members is to select sections
that isolate the joints one at a time and then apply the laws of equilibrium to each.
5.64                                SECTION FIVE




         FIGURE 5.46 Common types of roof trusses.



Considering the stresses in the cut members as external forces, the sum of the
horizontal components of the forces acting at a joint must be zero, and so must be
the sum of the vertical components. Since the lines of action of all the forces are
known, we can therefore compute two unknown magnitudes at each joint by this
method. The procedure is to start at a joint that has only two unknowns (generally
at the support) and then, as stresses in members are determined, analyze successive
joints.
    Let us, for illustration, apply the method to joint 1 of the truss in Fig. 5.47a.
Equating the sum of the vertical components to zero, we find that the vertical
component of the top-chord must be equal and opposite to the reaction, 12 kips
(12,000 lb). The stress in the top chord at this joint, then, must be a compression
equal to 12 ⫻ 30⁄18 ⫽ 20 kips. From the fact that the sum of the horizontal com-
ponents must be zero, we find that the stress in the bottom chord at the joint must
be equal and opposite to the horizontal component of the top chord. Hence the
stress in the bottom chord must be a tension equal to 20 ⫻ 24⁄30 ⫽ 16 kips.
    Moving to joint 2, we note that, with no vertical loads at the joint, the stress in
the vertical is zero. Also, the stress is the same in both bottom chord members at
the joint, since the sum of the horizontal components must be zero.
    Joint 3 now contains only two unknown stresses. Denoting the truss members
and the loads by the letters placed on opposite sides of them, as indicated in Fig.
5.47a, the unknown stresses are SBH and SHG. The laws of equilibrium enable us to
                                   STRUCTURAL THEORY                                     5.65




         FIGURE 5.47 Method of joints applied to the roof truss shown in (a).
         Stresses in members at each joint are determined graphically in sucession (b)
         to (e).



write the following two equations, one for the vertical components and the second
for the horizontal components:

                      兺V ⫽ 0.6SFA ⫺ 8 ⫺ 0.6SBH ⫹ 0.6SHG ⫽ 0

                     兺H ⫽ 0.8SFA ⫺ 0.8SBH ⫺ 0.8SHG ⫽ 0

Both unknown stresses are assumed to be compressive; i.e., acting toward the joint.
The stress in the vertical does not appear in these equations, because it was already
determined to be zero. The stress in FA, SFA, was found from analysis of joint 1 to
be 20 kips. Simultaneous solution of the two equations yields SHG ⫽ 6.7 kips and
SBH ⫽ 13.3 kips. (If these stresses had come out with a negative sign, it would
have indicated that the original assumption of their directions was incorrect; they
would, in that case, be tensile forces instead of compressive forces.) See also Art.
5.9.4.
    All the force polygons in Fig. 5.47 can be conveniently combined into a single
stress diagram. The combination (Fig. 5.47ƒ ) is called a Maxwell diagram.
5.66                                 SECTION FIVE


5.9.4   Method of Sections

An alternative method to that described in Art. 5.9.3 for determining the stresses
in truss members is to isolate a portion of the truss by a section so chosen as to
cut only as many members with unknown stresses as can be evaluated by the laws
of equilibrium applied to that portion of the truss. The stresses in the cut members
are treated as external forces. Compressive forces act toward the panel point and
tensile forces away from the joint.
   Suppose, for example, we wish to find the stress in chord AB of the truss in
Fig. 5.48a. We can take a vertical section XX close to panel point A. This cuts not
only AB but AD and ED as well. The external 10-kip (10,000-lb) loading and 25-
kip reaction at the left are held in equilibrium by the compressive force C in AB,
tensile force T in ED, and tensile force S in AD (Fig. 5.48b). The simplest way to
find C is to take moments about D, the point of intersection of S and T, eliminating
these unknowns from the calculation.
                   ⫺9C ⫹ 36 ⫻ 25 ⫺ 24 ⫻ 10 ⫺ 12 ⫻ 10 ⫽ 0

from which C is found to be 60 kips.
   Similarly, to find the stress in ED, the simplest way is to take moments about
A, the point of intersection of S and C:
                          ⫺9T ⫹ 24 ⫻ 25 ⫺ 12 ⫻ 10 ⫽ 0

from which T is found to be 53.3 kips.




          FIGURE 5.48 Stresses in truss members cut by section XX, shown in (a),
          are determined by method of sections (b).
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.67


    On the other hand, the stress in AD can be easily determined by two methods.
One takes advantage of the fact that AB and ED are horizontal members, requiring
AD to carry the full vertical shear at section XX. Hence we know that the vertical
component V of S ⫽ 25 ⫺ 10 ⫺ 10 ⫽ 5 kips. Multiplying V by sec ␪ (Fig. 5.48b),
which is equal to the ratio of the length of AD to the rise of the truss (15⁄9), S is
found to be 8.3 kips. The second method—presented because it is useful when the
chords are not horizontal—is to resolve S into horizontal and vertical components
at D and take moments about E. Since both T and the horizontal component of S
pass through E, they do not appear in the computations, and C already has been
computed. Equating the sum of the moments to zero gives V ⫽ 5, as before.
    Some trusses are complex and require special methods of analysis. (Norris et
al., ‘‘Elementary Structural Analysis,’’ 4th ed., McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York).


5.10     GENERAL TOOLS FOR
         STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS

For some types of structures, the equilibrium equations are not sufficient to deter-
mine the reactions or the internal stresses. These structures are called statically
indeterminate.
   For the analysis of such structures, additional equations must be written on the
basis of a knowledge of the elastic deformations. Hence methods of analysis that
enable deformations to be evaluated in terms of unknown forces or stresses are
important for the solution of problems involving statically indeterminate structures.
Some of these methods, like the method of virtual work, are also useful in solving
complicated problems involving statically determinate systems.


5.10.1   Virtual Work

A virtual displacement is an imaginary small displacement of a particle consistent
with the constraints upon it. Thus, at one support of a simply supported beam, the
virtual displacement could be an infinitesimal rotation d␪ of that end but not a
vertical movement. However, if the support is replaced by a force, then a vertical
virtual displacement may be applied to the beam at that end.
    Virtual work is the product of the distance a particle moves during a virtual
displacement by the component in the direction of the displacement of a force
acting on the particle. If the displacement and the force are in opposite directions,
the virtual work is negative. When the displacement is normal to the force, no work
is done.
    Suppose a rigid body is acted upon by a system of forces with a resultant R.
Given a virtual displacement ds at an angle ␣ with R, the body will have virtual
work done on it equal to R cos ␣ ds. (No work is done by internal forces. They
act in pairs of equal magnitude but opposite direction, and the virtual work done
by one force of a pair is equal but opposite in sign to the work done by the other
force.) If the body is in equilibrium under the action of the forces, then R ⫽ 0 and
the virtual work also is zero.
    Thus, the principle of virtual work may be stated: If a rigid body in equilibrium
is given a virtual displacement, the sum of the virtual work of the forces acting
on it must be zero.
5.68                                      SECTION FIVE

                                                       As an example of how the principle
                                                   may be used to find a reaction of a stat-
                                                   ically determinate beam, consider the
                                                   simple beam in Fig. 5.49a, for which the
                                                   reaction R is to be determined. First, re-
                                                   place the support by an unknown force
                                                   R. Next, move that end of the beam up-
                                                   ward a small amount dy as in Fig. 5.49b.
                                                   The displacement under the load P will
                                                   be x dy / L, upward. Then, by the prin-
                                                   ciple of virtual work, R dy ⫺ Px dy / L ⫽
                                                   0, from which R ⫽ Px / L.
                                                       The principle may also be used to
                                                   find the reaction R of the more complex
                                                   beam in Fig. 5.49c. The first step again
                                                   is to replace the support by an unknown
                                                   force R. Next, apply a virtual downward
                                                   displacement dy at hinge A (Fig. 5.49d
                                                   ). Displacement under load P is x dy / c,
                                                   and at the reaction R, a dy / (a ⫹ b). Ac-
                                                   cording to the principle of virtual work,
                                                   ⫺Ra dy / (a ⫹ b) ⫹ Px dy / c ⫽ 0, from
                                                   which reaction R ⫽ Px(a ⫹ b) / ac. In
                                                   this type of problem, the method has the
                                                   advantage that only one reaction need
                                                   be considered at a time and internal
                                                   forces are not involved.


FIGURE 5.49 Principle of virtual work ap-
plied to determination of a simple-beam reaction
                                                   5.10.2   Strain Energy
(a) and (b) and to the reaction of a beam with
a suspended span (c) and (d ).              When an elastic body is deformed, the
                                            virtual work done by the internal forces
                                            is equal to the corresponding increment
of the strain energy dU, in accordance with the principle of virtual work.
   Assume a constrained elastic body acted upon by forces P1, P2, . . . , for which
the corresponding deformations are e1, e2 . . . . Then, 兺Pn den ⫽ dU. The increment
of the strain energy due to the increments of the deformations is given by

                                       ⭸U      ⭸U
                               dU ⫽       de ⫹    de ⫹   
                                       ⭸e1 1   ⭸e2 2

In solving a specific problem, a virtual displacement that is not convenient in sim-
plifying the solution should be chosen. Suppose, for example, a virtual displacement
is selected that affects only the deformation en corresponding to the load Pn, other
deformations being unchanged. Then, the principle of virtual work requires that

                                                   ⭸U
                                       Pn den ⫽       de
                                                   ⭸en n

This is equivalent to
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.69


                                         ⭸U
                                             ⫽ Pn                                 (5.92)
                                         ⭸en

                                              which states that the partial derivative of
                                              the strain energy with respect to any
                                              specific deformation gives the corre-
                                              sponding force.
                                                  Suppose, for example, the stress in
                                              the vertical bar in Fig. 5.50 is to be de-
                                              termined. All bars are made of the same
                                              material and have the same cross sec-
                                              tion. If the vertical bar stretches an
                                              amount e under the load P, the inclined
                                              bars will each stretch an amount e cos
FIGURE 5.50 Statically indeterminate truss.   ␣. The strain energy in the system is
                                              [from Eq. (5.30)]
                                      AE 2
                              U⫽         (e ⫹ 2e 2 cos3 ␣)
                                      2L
and the partial derivative of this with respect to e must be equal to P; that is
                                      AE
                               P⫽        (2e ⫹ 4e cos3 ␣)
                                      2L
                                      AEe
                                  ⫽       (1 ⫹ 2 cos3 ␣)
                                       L
Noting that the force in the vertical bar equals AEe / L, we find from the above
equation that the required stress equals P / (1 ⫹ 2 cos3 ␣).

Castigliano’s Theorems. It can also be shown that, if the strain energy is ex-
pressed as a function of statically independent forces, the partial derivative of the
strain energy with respect to one of the forces gives the deformation corresponding
to that force. (See Timoshenko and Young, ‘‘Theory of Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill
Publishing Company, New York.)
                                         ⭸U
                                             ⫽ en                                 (5.93)
                                         ⭸Pn

This is known as Castigliano’s first theorem. (His second theorem is the principle
of least work.)


5.10.3   Method of Least Work

If displacement of a structure is prevented, as at a support, the partial derivative of
the strain energy with respect to that supporting force must be zero, according to
Castigliano’s first theorem. This establishes his second theorem:
    The strain energy in a statically indeterminate structure is the minimum
consistent with equilibrium.
5.70                               SECTION FIVE


    As an example of the use of the method of least work, we shall solve again for
the stress in the vertical bar in Fig. 5.50. Calling this stress X, we note that the
stress in each of the inclined bars must be ( P ⫺ X) / 2 cos ␣. With the aid of Eq.
(5.30), we can express the strain energy in the system in terms of X as
                                  X 2L   (P ⫺ X)2L
                             U⫽        ⫹
                                  2AE 4AE cos3 ␣
Hence, the internal work in the system will be a minimum when
                           ⭸U   XL   (P ⫺ X)L
                              ⫽    ⫺          ⫽0
                           ⭸X   AE 2AE cos3 ␣
Solving for X gives the stress in the vertical bar as P / (1 ⫹ 2 cos3 ␣), as before
(Art. 5.10.1).


5.10.4   Dummy Unit-Load Method

In Art. 5.2.7, the strain energy for pure bending was given as U ⫽ M 2L / 2EI in Eq.
(5.33). To find the strain energy due to bending stress in a beam, we can apply this
equation to a differential length dx of the beam and integrate over the entire span.
Thus,

                                  U⫽       冕
                                           0
                                               L
                                                   M 2 dx
                                                    2EI
                                                                             (5.94)

If M represents the bending moment due to a generalized force P, the partial de-
rivative of the strain energy with respect to P is the deformation d corresponding
to P. Differentiating Eq. (5.94) under the integral sign gives

                                 d⫽   冕L

                                       0
                                               M ⭸M
                                               EI ⭸P
                                                     dx                      (5.95)

The partial derivative in this equation is the rate of change of bending moment with
the load P. It is equal to the bending moment m produced by a unit generalized
load applied at the point where the deformation is to be measured and in the
direction of the deformation. Hence, Eq. (5.95) can also be written

                                  d⫽   冕   L

                                           0
                                                   Mm
                                                   EI
                                                      dx                     (5.96)

To find the vertical deflection of a beam, we apply a vertical dummy unit load at
the point where the deflection is to be measured and substitute the bending moments
due to this load and the actual loading in Eq. (5.96). Similarly, to compute a ro-
tation, we apply a dummy unit moment.

Beam Deflections. As a simple example, let us apply the dummy unit-load
method to the determination of the deflection at the center of a simply supported,
uniformly loaded beam of constant moment of inertia (Fig. 5.51a). As indicated in
Fig. 5.51b, the bending moment at a distance x from one end is (wL / 2)x ⫺ (w /
2)x 2. If we apply a dummy unit load vertically at the center of the beam (Fig.
                                       STRUCTURAL THEORY                                   5.71




FIGURE 5.51 Dummy unit-load method ap-              FIGURE 5.52 End rotation of a simple beam
plied to a uniformly loaded, simple beam (a) to     due to an end moment: (a) by dummy unit-load
find mid-span deflection; (b) moment diagram        method; (b) moment diagram for the end mo-
for the uniform load; (c) unit load at midspan:     ment; (c) unit moment applied at beam end;
(d ) moment diagram for the unit load.              (d ) moment diagram for the unit moment.



5.51c), where the vertical deflection is to be determined, the moment at x is x / 2,
as indicated in Fig. 5.51d. Substituting in Eq. (5.96) and taking advantage of the
symmetry of the loading gives

                       d⫽2     冕0
                                 L/2

                                       冉   wL
                                            2
                                                 w
                                              x ⫺ x2
                                                 2      冊
                                                     x dx
                                                          ⫽
                                                            5wL4
                                                     2 EI 384EI

Beam End Rotations. As another example, let us apply the method to finding the
end rotation at one end of a simply supported, prismatic beam produced by a
moment applied at the other end. In other words, the problem is to find the end
rotation at B, ␪B, in Fig. 5.52a, due to MA. As indicated in Fig. 5.52b, the bending
moment at a distance x from B caused by MA is MAx / L. If we applied a dummy
unit moment at B (Fig. 5.52c), it would produce a moment at x of (L ⫺ x) / L (Fig.
5.52d ). Substituting in Eq. (5.96) gives

                              ␪B ⫽     冕
                                       0
                                        L
                                            MA
                                                 x L ⫺ x dx MAL
                                                 L L EI
                                                           ⫺
                                                             6EI

Shear Deflections. To determine the deflection of a beam caused by shear, Cas-
tigliano’s theorems can be applied to the strain energy in shear

                                       V⫽    冕 冕 2Gv dA dx
                                                    2
5.72                                SECTION FIVE


where v ⫽ shearing unit stress
     G ⫽ modulus of rigidity
      A ⫽ cross-sectional area

Truss Deflections. The dummy unit-load method may also be adapted for the
determination of the deformation of trusses. As indicated by Eq. (5.30), the strain
energy in a truss is given by

                                    U⫽    冘 2AE
                                            S L2
                                                                               (5.97)

which represents the sum of the strain energy for all the members of the truss. S
is the stress in each member caused by the loads. Applying Castigliano’s first
theorem and differentiating inside the summation sign yield the deformation:

                                   d⫽   冘 AE
                                          SL ⭸S
                                             ⭸P
                                                                               (5.98)

The partial derivative in this equation is the rate of change of axial stress with the
load P. It is equal to the axial stress u in each bar of the truss produced by a unit
load applied at the point where the deformation is to be measured and in the
direction of the deformation. Consequently, Eq. (5.98) can also be written

                                     d⫽   冘 Sul
                                            AE
                                                                               (5.99)

   To find the deflection of a truss, apply a vertical dummy unit load at the panel
point where the deflection is to be measured and substitute in Eq. (5.99) the stresses
in each member of the truss due to this load and the actual loading. Similarly, to
find the rotation of any joint, apply a dummy unit moment at the joint, compute
the stresses in each member of the truss, and substitute in Eq. (5.99). When it is
necessary to determine the relative movement of two panel points, apply dummy
unit loads in opposite directions at those points.
   It is worth noting that members that are not stressed by the actual loads or the
dummy loads do not enter into the calculation of a deformation.
   As an example of the application of Eq. (5.99), let us compute the deflection of
the truss in Fig. 5.53. The stresses due to the 20-kip load at each panel point are
shown in Fig. 5.53a, and the ratio of length of members in inches to their cross-
sectional area in square inches is given in Table 5.5. We apply a vertical dummy
unit load at L2, where the deflection is required. Stresses u due to this load are
shown in Fig. 5.53b and Table 5.5.
   The computations for the deflection are given in Table 5.5. Members not stressed
by the 20-kip loads or the dummy unit load are not included. Taking advantage of
the symmetry of the truss, we tabulate the values for only half the truss and double
the sum.
                           SuL 2 ⫻ 13.742,000
                      d⫽      ⫽               ⫽ 0.916 in
                           AE    30,000,000
Also, to reduce the amount of calculation, we do not include the modulus of
elasticity E, which is equal to 30,000,000, until the very last step, since it is the
same for all members.
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                                    5.73




FIGURE 5.53 Dummy unit-load method applied to the loaded truss shown in (a) to find midspan
deflection; (b) unit load applied at midspan.



                    TABLE 5.5 Deflection of a Truss

                    Member       L/A         S         u       SuL / A
                      L0L2       160      ⫹40        ⫹2⁄3      4,267
                      L0U1        75      ⫺50        ⫺5⁄6      3,125
                      U1U2        60      ⫺53.3      ⫺4⁄3      4,267
                      U1L2       150      ⫹16.7      ⫹5⁄6       2,083
                                                               13,742



5.10.5   Reciprocal Theorem and Influence Lines

Consider a structure loaded by a group of independent forces A, and suppose that
a second group of forces B are added. The work done by the forces A acting over
the displacements due to B will be WAB.
   Now, suppose the forces B had been on the structure first, and then load A had
been applied. The work done by the forces B acting over the displacements due to
A will be WBA.
   The reciprocal theorem states that WAB ⫽ WBA.
   Some very useful conclusions can be drawn from this equation. For example,
there is the reciprocal deflection relationship: The deflection at a point A due to
a load at B is equal to the deflection at B due to the same load applied at A.
Also, the rotation at A due to a load (or moment) at B is equal to the rotation
at B due to the same load (or moment) applied at A.
   Another consequence is that deflection curves may also be influence lines to
some scale for reactions, shears, moments, or deflections (Muller-Breslau princi-
ples). (Influence lines are defined in Art. 5.5.8.) For example, suppose the influence
5.74                                 SECTION FIVE


line for a reaction is to be found; that is, we wish to plot the reaction R as a unit
load moves over the structure, which may be statically indeterminate. For the load-
ing condition A, we analyze the structure with a unit load on it at a distance x from
some reference point. For loading condition B, we apply a dummy unit vertical
load upward at the place where the reaction is to be determined, deflecting the
structure off the support. At a distance x from the reference point, the displacement
in dxR and over the support the displacement is dRR. Hence WAB ⫽ ⫺ 1 (DxR) ⫹
RdRR. On the other hand, WBA is zero, since loading condition A provides no dis-
placement for the dummy unit load at the support in condition B. Consequently,
from the reciprocal theorem,
                                             dxR
                                        R⫽
                                             dRR
Since dRR is a constant, R is proportional to dxR. Hence the influence line for a
reaction can be obtained from the deflection curve resulting from a displacement
of the support (Fig. 5.54). The magnitude of the reaction is obtained by dividing
each ordinate of the deflection curve by the displacement of the support.
   Similarly, the influence line for shear can be obtained from the deflection curve
produced by cutting the structure and shifting the cut ends vertically at the point
for which the influence line is desired (Fig. 5.55).
   The influence line for bending moment can be obtained from the deflection curve
produced by cutting the structure and rotating the cut ends at the point for which
the influence line is desired (Fig. 5.56).
   And finally, it may be noted that the deflection curve for a load of unity at some
point of a structure is also the influence line for deflection at that point (Fig. 5.57).


5.10.6   Superposition Methods

The principle of superposition applies when the displacement (deflection or rota-
tion) of every point of a structure is directly proportional to the applied loads. The




FIGURE 5.54 Reaction-influence line for a     FIGURE 5.55 Shear-influence line for a con-
continuous beam.                              tinuous beam.




FIGURE 5.56 Moment-influence line for a       FIGURE 5.57 Deflection-influence line for a
continuous beam.                              continuous beam.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.75


principle states that the displacement at each point caused by several loads equals
the sum of the displacements at the point when the loads are applied to the structure
individually in any sequence. Also, the bending moment (or shear) at every point
induced by applied loads equals the sum of the bending moments (or shears) in-
duced at the point by the loads applied individually in any sequence.
    The principle holds for linearly elastic structures, for which unit stresses are
proportional to unit strains, when displacements are very small and calculations can
be based on the underformed configuration of the structure without significant error.
    As a simple example, consider a bar with length L and cross-sectional area A
loaded with n axial loads P1, P2 . . . Pn. Let F equal the sum of the loads. From
Eq. (5.23), F causes an elongation ␦ ⫽ FL / AE, where E is the modulus of elasticity
of the bar. According to the principle of superposition, if e1 is the elongation caused
by P1 alone, e2 by P2 alone, . . and en by Pn alone, then regardless of the sequence
in which the loads are applied, when all the loads are on the bar,

                              ␦ ⫽ e1 ⫹ e2 ⫹    ⫹ en

This simple case can be easily verified by substituting e1 ⫽ P1L / AE, e2 ⫽ P2L / AE,
. . . , and en ⫽ PnL / AE in this equation and noting that F ⫽ P1 ⫹ P2 ⫹    ⫹ Pn:

              P1L P2L          PL                           L   FL
         ␦⫽      ⫹    ⫹    ⫹ n ⫽ (P1 ⫹ P2 ⫹    ⫹ Pn)    ⫽
              AE   AE          AE                          AE AE

    In the preceding equations, L / AE represents the elongation induced by a unit
load and is called the flexibility of the bar.
    The reciprocal, AE / L, represents the force that causes a unit elongation and is
called the stiffness of the bar.
    Analogous properties of beams, columns, and other structural members and the
principle of superposition are useful in analysis of many types of structures. Cal-
culation of stresses and displacements of statically indeterminate structures, for
example, often can be simplified by resolution of bending moments, shears, and
displacements into components chosen to supply sufficient equations for the solu-
tion from requirements for equilibrium of forces and compatibility of displacements.
    Consider the continuous beam ALRBC shown in Fig. 5.58a. Under the loads
shown, member LR is subjected to end moments ML and MR (Fig. 5.58b) that are
initially unknown. The bending-moment diagram for LR for these end moments is
shown at the left in Fig. 5.58c. If these end moments were known, LR would be
statically determinate; that is LR could be treated as a simply supported beam
subjected to known end moments ML and MR. The analysis can be further simplified
by resolution of the bending-moment diagram into the three components shown to
the right of the equal sign in Fig. 5.58c. This example leads to the following
conclusion:
    The bending moment at any section of a span LR of a continuous beam or
frame equals the simple-beam moment due to the applied loads, plus the sim-
ple-beam moment due to the end moment at L, plus the simple-beam moment
due to the end moment at R.
    When the moment diagrams for all the spans of ALRBC in Fig. 5.58 have been
resolved into components so that the spans may be treated as simple beams, all the
end moments (moments at supports) can be determined from two basic require-
ments:
5.76                                   SECTION FIVE




          FIGURE 5.58 Any span of a continuous beam (a) can be treated as a
          simple beam, as shown in (b) and (c), the moment diagram is resolved into
          basic components.


1. The sum of the moments at every support equals zero.
2. The end rotation (angular change at the support) of each member rigidly con-
   nected at the support is the same.


5.10.7   Influence-Coefficient Matrices

A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers in rows and columns that obeys certain
mathematical rules known generally as matrix algebra and matrix calculus. A matrix
consisting of only a single column is called a vector. In this book, matrices and
vectors are represented by boldfaced letters and their elements by lightface symbols,
with appropriate subscripts. It often is convenient to use numbers for the subscripts
to indicate the position of an element in the matrix. Generally, the first digit indi-
cates the row and the second digit the column. Thus, in matrix A, A23 represents
the element in the second row and third column:


                                         冤             冥
                                       A11 A12 A13
                                   A ⫽ A21 A22 A23                                    (5.100)
                                       A31 A32 A33

   Methods based on matrix representations often are advantageous for structural
analysis and design of complex structures. One reason is that matrices provide a
compact means of representing and manipulating large quantities of numbers. An-
other reason is that computers can perform matrix operations automatically and
speedily. Computer programs are widely available for this purpose.

Matrix Equations. Matrix notation is especially convenient in representing the
solution of simultaneous liner equations, which arise frequently in structural anal-
ysis. For example, suppose a set of equations is represented in matrix notation by
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.77


AX ⫽ B, where X is the vector of variables X1, X2, . . . , Xn, B is the vector of the
constants on the right-hand side of the equations, and A is a matrix of the coeffi-
cients of the variables. Multiplication of both sides of the equation by A⫺1, the
inverse of A, yields A⫺1 AX ⫽ A⫺1 B. Since A⫺1 A ⫽ I, the identity matrix, and IX
⫽ X, the solution of the equations is represented by X ⫽ A⫺1B. The matrix inver-
sion A⫺1 can be readily performed by computers. For large matrices, however, it
often is more practical to solve the equations, for example, by the Gaussian pro-
cedure of eliminating one unknown at a time.
   In the application of matrices to structural analysis, loads and displacements are
considered applied at the intersection of members (joints, or nodes). The loads may
be resolved into moments, torques, and horizontal and vertical components. These
may be assembled for each node into a vector and then all the node vectors may
be combined into a force vector P for the whole structure.



                                          冤冥
                                           P1
                                           P2
                                     P⫽                                      (5.101)
                                           ⯗
                                           Pn

Similarly, displacement corresponding to those forces may be resolved into rota-
tions, twists, and horizontal and vertical components and assembled for the whole
structure into a vector ⌬.



                                          冤冥
                                           ⌬1
                                           ⌬2
                                    ⌬⫽                                       (5.102)
                                           ⯗
                                           ⌬n

If the structure meets requirements for application of the principle of superposition
(Art. 5.10.6) and forces and displacements are arranged in the proper sequence, the
vectors of forces and displacements are related by

                                      P ⫽ K⌬                                (5.103a)
                                      ⌬ ⫽ FP                                (5.103b)

where K ⫽ stiffness matrix of the whole structure
      F ⫽ flexibility matrix of the whole structure ⫽ K⫺1

   The stiffness matrix K transform displacements into loads. The flexibility matrix
F transforms loads into displacements. The elements of K and F are functions of
material properties, such as the modules of elasticity; geometry of the structure;
and sectional properties of members of the structure, such as area and moment of
inertia. K and F are square matrices; that is, the number of rows in each equals
the number of columns. In addition, both matrices are symmetrical; that is, in each
matrix, the columns and rows may be interchanged without changing the matrix.
Thus, Kij ⫽ Kji, and Fij ⫽ Fji, where i indicates the row in which an element is
located and j the column.

Influence Coefficients. Elements of the stiffness and flexibility matrices are in-
fluence are coefficients. Each element is derived by computing the displacements
(or forces) occurring at nodes when a unit displacement (or force) is imposed at
one node, while all other displacements (or forces) are taken as zero.
5.78                                 SECTION FIVE


   Let ⌬i be the ith element of matrix ⌬. Then a typical element Fij of F gives the
displacement of anode i in the direction of ⌬i when a unit force acts at a node j in
the direction of force Pj and no other forces are acting on the structure. The jth
column of F, therefore, contains all the nodal displacements induced by a unit force
acting at node j in the direction of Pj.
   Similarly, Let Pi be the ith element of matrix P. Then, a typical element Kij of
K gives the force at a node i in the direction of Pi when a node j is given a unit
displacement in the direction of displacement ⌬j and no other displacements are
permitted. The jth column of K, therefore, contains all the nodal forces caused by
a unit displacement of node j in the direction of ⌬j.
Application to a Beam. A general method for determining the forces and mo-
ments in a continuous beam is as follows: Remove as many redundant supports or
members as necessary to make the structure statically determinant. Compute for
the actual loads the deflections or rotations of the statically determinate structure
in the direction of the unknown forces and couples exerted by the removed supports
and members. Then, in terms of these forces and couples, treated as variables,
compute the corresponding deflections or rotations the forces and couples produce
in the statically determinate structure (see Arts. 5.5.16 and 5.10.4). Finally, for each
redundant support or member write equations that give the known rotations or
deflections of the original structure in terms of the deformations of the statically
determinate structure.
    For example, one method of finding the reactions of the continuous beam AC
in Fig. 5.59a is to remove supports 1, 2, and 3 temporarily. The beam is now
simply supported between A and C, and the reactions and moments can be com-
puted from the laws of equilibrium. Beam AC deflects at points 1, 2, and 3, whereas
we know that the continuous beam is prevented from deflecting at these points by
the supports there. This information enables us to write three equations in terms of
the three unknown reactions that were eliminated to make the beam statically de-
terminate.
    To determine the equations, assume that nodes exist at the location of the sup-
ports 1, 2, and 3. Then, for the actual loads, compute the vertical deflections d1,
d2, and d3 of simple beam AC at nodes 1, 2, and 3, respectively (Fig. 5.59b). Next,
form two vectors, d with element d1, d2 and R with the unknown reactions R1 at
node 1, R2 at node 2, and R3 at node 3 as elements. Since the beam may be assumed
to be linearly elastic, set d ⴝ FR, where F is the flexibility matrix for simple beam
AC. The elements yij of F are influence coefficients. To determine them, calculate
column 1 of F as the deflections y11, y21, and y31 at nodes 1, 2, and 3, respectively,
when a unit force is applied at node 1 (Fig. 5.59c). Similarly, compute column 2
of F for a unit force at node 2 (Fig. 5.59d ) and column 3 for a unit force at node
3 (Fig. 5.59e). The three equations then are given by


                             冤           冥冤 冥 冤 冥
                               y11 y12 y13   R1   d1
                               y21 y22 y23   R2 ⫽ d2                            (5.104)
                               y31 y32 y33   R3   d3
The solution may be represented by R ⴝ F⫺1 d and obtained by matrix or algebraic
methods. See also Art. 5.13.


5.11   CONTINUOUS BEAMS AND FRAMES

Fixed-end beams, continuous beams, continuous trusses, and rigid frames are stat-
ically indeterminate. The equations of equilibrium are not sufficient for the deter-
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.79




                     FIGURE 5.59 Determination of reactions of
                     continuous beam AC: (a) Loaded beam with sup-
                     ports at points 1, 2, and 3. (b) Deflection of beam
                     when supports are removed. (c) to (e) Deflections
                     when a unit load is applied successively at points
                     1, 2, and 3.



mination of all the unknown forces and moments. Additional equations based on a
knowledge of the deformation of the member are required.
   Hence, while the bending moments in a simply supported beam are determined
only by the loads and the span, bending moments in a statically indeterminate
member are also a function of the geometry, cross-sectional dimensions, and mod-
ulus of elasticity.


5.11.1   Sign Convention

For computation of end moments in continuous beams and frames, the following
sign convention is most convenient: A moment acting at an end of a member or at
a joint is positive if it tends to rotate the joint clockwise, negative if it tends to
rotate the joint counterclockwise.
   Similarly, the angular rotation at the end of a member is positive if in a clockwise
direction, negative if counterclockwise. Thus, a positive end moment produces a
positive end rotation in a simple beam.
   For ease in visualizing the shape of the elastic curve under the action of loads
and end moments, bending-moment diagrams should be plotted on the tension side
5.80                                SECTION FIVE


of each member. Hence, if an end moment is represented by a curved arrow, the
arrow will point in the direction in which the moment is to be plotted.


5.11.2   Carry-Over Moments

When a member of a continuous beam or frame is loaded, bending moments are
induced at the ends of the member as well as between the ends. The magnitude of
the end moments depends on the magnitude and location of the loads, the geometry
of the member, and the amount of restraint offered to end rotation of the member
by other members connected to it. Because of the restraint, end moments are in-
duced in the connecting members, in addition to end moments that may be induced
by loads on those spans.
    If the far end of a connecting member is restrained by support conditions against
rotation, a resisting moment is induced at that end. That moment is called a carry-
over moment. The ratio of the carry-over moment to the other end moment is called
carry-over factor. It is constant for the member, independent of the magnitude and
direction of the moments to be carried over. Every beam has two carry-over factors,
one directed toward each end.
    As pointed out in Art. 5.10.6, analysis of a continuous span can be simplified
by treating it as a simple beam subjected to applied end moments. Thus, it is
convenient to express the equations for carry-over factors in terms of the end ro-
tations of simple beams: Convert a continuous member LR to a simple beam with
the same span L. Apply a unit moment to one end (Fig. 5.60). The end rotation at
the support where the moment is applied is ␣, and at the far end, the rotation is ␤.
By the dummy-load method (Art. 5.10.4), if x is measured from the ␤ end,

                              ␣⫽   冕1
                                    L2
                                         L

                                         0
                                             x2
                                             EIx
                                                 dx                           (5.105)


                              ␤⫽
                                 1
                                 L
                                   冕 2
                                         L

                                         0
                                             x(L ⫺ x)
                                                EIx
                                                      dx                      (5.106)

in which Ix ⫽ moment of inertia at a section a distance of x from the ␤ end
         E ⫽ modulus of elasticity
In accordance with the reciprocal theorem (Art. 5.10.5) ␤ has the same value re-
gardless of the beam end to which the unit moment is applied (Fig. 5.60). For
prismatic beams (Ix ⫽ constant),




           FIGURE 5.60 End rotations of a simple beam LR when a unit moment
           is applied (a) at end L and (b) at end R.
                                   STRUCTURAL THEORY                                         5.81


                                                         L
                                      ␣L ⫽ ␣R ⫽                                          (5.107)
                                                        3EI
                                              L
                                       ␤⫽                                                (5.108)
                                             6EI

Carry-Over Factors. The preceding equations can be used to determine carry-
over factors for any magnitude of end restraint. The carry-over factors toward fixed
ends, however, are of special importance.
   The bending-moment diagram for a continuous span LR that is not loaded except
for a moment M applied at end L is shown in Fig. 5.61a. For determination of the
carry-over factor CR toward R, that end is assumed fixed (no rotation can occur
there). The carry-over moment to R then is CR M. The moment diagram in Fig.
5.61a can be resolved into two components: a simple beam with M applied at L
(Fig. 5.61b) and a simple beam with CR M applied at R (Fig. 5.61c). As indicated
in Fig. 5.61d, M causes an angle change at R of ⫺␤. As shown in Fig. 5.61e, CR
M induces an angle change at R of CR M␣R. Since the net angle change at R is zero
(Fig. 5.61ƒ ), CR M␣R ⫺ M␤ ⫽ 0, from which

                                                   ␤
                                          CR ⫽                                           (5.109)
                                                   ␣R

Similarly, the carry-over factor toward support L is given by

                                                   ␤
                                          CL ⫽                                           (5.110)
                                                   ␣L

Since the carry-over factors are positive, the moment carried over has the same
sign as the applied moment. For prismatic beams, ␤ ⫽ L / 6EI and ␣ ⫽ L / 3EI.
Hence,




      FIGURE 5.61 Effect of applying an end moment M to any span of a continuous
      beam: (a) An end moment CR M is induced at the opposite end. (b) and (c) The
      moment diagram in (a) is resolved into moment diagrams for a simple beam. (d )
      and (e) Addition of the end rotations corresponding to conditions (b) and (c) yields
      ( ƒ ), the end rotations induced by M in the beam shown in (a)
5.82                                  SECTION FIVE


                                             L 3EI 1
                               CL ⫽ CR ⫽          ⫽                               (5.111)
                                            6EI L   2
For beams with variable moment of inertia, ␤ and ␣ can be determined from Eqs.
(5.105) and (5.106) and the carry-over factors from Eqs. (5.109) and (5.110).
   If an end of a beam is free to rotate, the carry-over factor toward that end is
zero.
                                              5.11.3    Fixed-End Stiffness

                                                 The fixed-end stiffness of a beam is de-
                                                 fined as the moment that is required to
                                                 induce a unit rotation at the support
                                                 where it is applied while the other end
                                                 of the beam is fixed against rotation.
                                                 Stiffness is important because, in the
                                                 moment-distribution method, it deter-
                                                 mines the proportion of the total mo-
                                                 ment applied at a joint, or intersection
                                                 of members, that is distributed to each
                                                 member of the joint.
                                                    In Fig. 5.62a, the fixed-end stiffness
                                                 of beam LR at end R is represented by
FIGURE 5.62 Determination of fixed-end KR. When KR is applied to beam LR at
stiffness: (a) elastic curve for moment KR caus- R, a moment M ⫽ C K is carried over
                                                                L      L R
ing a unit end rotation; (b) the moment diagram
for condition (a).                               to end L, where CL is the carry-over fac-
                                                 tor toward L (see Art. 5.11.2). KR in-
duces an angle change ␣R at R, where ␣R is given by Eq. (5.105). The carry-over
moment induces at R an angle change ⫺CLkR␤, where ␤ is given by Eq. (5.106).
Since, by the definition of stiffness, the total angle change at R is unit, KR␣R ⫺
CLKR␤ ⫽ 1, from which
                                             1 / ␣R
                                    KR ⫽                                          (5.112)
                                           1 ⫺ CRCL
when CR is substituted for ␤ / ␣R [see Eq. (5.109)].
  In a similar manner, the stiffness at L is found to be
                                             1 / ␣L
                                    KL ⫽                                          (5.113)
                                           1 ⫺ CRCL
With the use of Eqs. (5.107) and (5.111), the stiffness of a beam with constant
moment of inertia is given by
                                           3EI/ L      4EI
                          KL ⫽ KR ⫽                  ⫽                            (5.114)
                                       1 ⫺ 1/2 ⫻ 1/2    L
where L ⫽ span of the beam
      E ⫽ modulus of elasticity
      I ⫽ moment of inertia of beam cross section

Beam with Hinge. The stiffness of one end of a beam when the other end is free
to rotate can be obtained from Eqs. (5.112) or (5.113) by setting the carry-over
factor toward the hinged end equal to zero. Thus, for a prismatic beam with one
end hinged, the stiffness of the beam at the other end is given by
                                    STRUCTURAL THEORY                                       5.83


                                                 3EI
                                           K⫽                                           (5.115)
                                                  L

This equation indicates that a prismatic beam hinged at only one end has three-
fourths the stiffness, or resistance to end rotation, of a beam fixed at both ends.



5.11.4   Fixed-End Moments

A beam so restrained at its ends that no rotation is produced there by the loads is
called a fixed-end beam, and the end moments are called fixed-end moments. Fixed-
end moments may be expressed as the product of a coefficient and WL, where W
is the total load on the span L. The coefficient is independent of the properties of
other members of the structure. Thus, any member can be isolated from the rest of
the structure and its fixed-end moments computed.
    Assume, for example, that the fixed-end moments for the loaded beam in Fig.
5.63a are to be determined. Let M FL be the moment at the left end L and M FR the
moment at the right end R of the beam. Based on the condition that no rotation is
permitted at either end and that the reactions at the supports are in equilibrium with
the applied loads, two equations can be written for the end moments in terms of
the simple-beam end rotations, ␪L at L and ␪R, at R for the specific loading.
    Let KL be the fixed-end stiffness at L and KR the fixed-end stiffness at R, as
given by Eqs. (5.112) and (5.113). Then, by resolution of the moment diagram into
simple-beam components, as indicated in Fig. 5.63ƒ to h, and application of the
superposition principle (Art. 5.10.6), the fixed-end moments are found to be

                                  M FL ⫽ ⫺KL(␪L ⫹ CR␪R)                                 (5.116)

                                  M FR ⫽ ⫺KR(␪R ⫹ CL␪L)                                 (5.117)

where CL and CR are the carry-over factors to L and R, respectively [Eqs. (5.109)
and (5.110)]. The end rotations ␪L and ␪R can be computed by a method described
in Art. 5.5.15 or 5.10.4.

Prismatic Beams. The fixed-end moments for beams with constant moment of
inertia can be derived from the equations given above with the use of Eqs. (5.111)
and (5.114):




 FIGURE 5.63 Determination of fixed-end moments in beam LR: (a) Loads on the fixed-end
 beam are resolved (b) to (d ) into the sum of loads on a simple beam. (e) to (h) Bending-moment
 diagrams for conditions (a) to (d ), respectively.
5.84                                   SECTION FIVE



                               M FL ⫽ ⫺
                                       4EI
                                        L      冉
                                               1
                                           ␪L ⫹ ␪R
                                               2             冊                      (5.118)


                               M FR ⫽ ⫺
                                       4EI
                                        L      冉
                                               1
                                           ␪R ⫹ ␪L
                                               2             冊                      (5.119)

where L ⫽ span of the beam
      E ⫽ modulus of elasticity
      I ⫽ moment of inertia
For horizontal beams with gravity loads only, ␪R is negative. As a result, M FL is
negative and M FR positive.
   For propped beams (one end fixed, one end hinged) with variable moment of
inertia, the fixed-end moments are given by
                                   ⫺␪L                          ⫺␪R
                          M LF ⫽              or       M RF ⫽                       (5.120)
                                   ␣L                           ␣R
where ␣L and ␣R are given by Eq. (5.105). For prismatic propped beams, the fixed-
end moments are
                               ⫺3EI␪L                           ⫺3EI␪R
                      M FL ⫽                  or       M FR ⫽                       (5.121)
                                   L                              L

Deflection of Supports. Fixed-end moments for loaded beams when one support
is displaced vertically with respect to the other support may be computed with the
use of Eqs. (5.116) to (5.121) and the principle of superposition: Compute the fixed-
end moments induced by the deflection of the beam when not loaded and add them
to the fixed-end moments for the loaded condition with immovable supports.
    The fixed-end moments for the unloaded condition can be determined directly
from Eqs. (5.116) and (5.117). Consider beam LR in Fig. 5.64, with span L and
support R deflected a distance d vertically below its original position. If the beam
were simply supported, the angle change caused by the displacement of R would
be very nearly d / L. Hence, to obtain the fixed-end moments for the deflected con-
ditions, set ␪L ⫽ ␪R ⫽ d / L and substitute these simple-beam end rotations in Eqs.
(5.116) and (5.117):
                                M FL ⫽ ⫺KL(1 ⫹ CR)d / L                             (5.122)

                                M FR ⫽ ⫺KR(1 ⫹ CL)d / L                             (5.123)
If end L is displaced downward with respect to R, d / L would be negative and the
fixed-end moments positive.




FIGURE 5.64 End moments caused by dis-             FIGURE 5.65 End moment caused by dis-
placement d of one end of a fixed-end beam.        placement d of one end of a propped beam.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.85


     For beams with constant moment of inertia, the fixed-end moments are given
by
                                              6EI d
                               M FL ⫽ M FR ⫽ ⫺                               (5.124)
                                               L L
   The fixed-end moments for a propped beam, such as beam LR shown in Fig.
5.65, can be obtained similarly from Eq. (5.120). For variable moment of inertia,
                                            d 1
                                    MF ⫽                                     (5.125)
                                            L ␣L
For a prismatic propped beam,
                                         3EI d
                                   MF ⫽ ⫺                                    (5.126)
                                          L L
Reverse signs for downward displacement of end L.

Computation Aids for Prismatic Beams. Fixed-end moments for several common
types of loading on beams of constant moment of inertia (prismatic beams) are
given in Figs. 5.66 to 5.69. Also, the curves in Fig. 5.71 enable fixed-end moments
to be computed easily for any type of loading on a prismatic beam. Before the




FIGURE 5.66 Moments for concentrated load   FIGURE 5.67 Moments for a uniform load on
on a prismatic fixed-end beam.              a prismatic fixed-end beam.




FIGURE 5.68 Moments for two equal loads     FIGURE 5.69 Moments for several equal
on a prismatic fixed-end beam.              loads on a prismatic fixed-end beam.
5.86                                 SECTION FIVE


curves can be entered, however, certain characteristics of the loading must be cal-
culated. These include xL, the location of the center of gravity of the loading with
respect to one of the loads: G2 ⫽ 兺b2n Pn / W, where bnL is the distance from each
load Pn to the center of gravity of the loading (taken positive to the right); and
S3 ⫽ 兺b3n Pn / W. (See Case 9, Fig. 5.70.) These values are given in Fig. 5.70 for
some common types of loading.
   The curves in Fig. 5.71 are entered with the location a of the center of gravity
with respect to the left end of the span. At the intersection with the proper G curve,
proceed horizontally to the left to the intersection within the proper S line, then
vertically to the horizontal scale indicating the coefficient m by which to multiply
WL to obtain the fixed-end moment. The curves solve the equations:

                        M FL
                 mL ⫽        ⫽ G2[1 ⫺ 3(1 ⫺ a)] ⫹ a(1 ⫺ a)2 ⫹ S 3             (5.127)
                        WL
                        M FR
                 mR ⫽        ⫽ G2(1 ⫺ 3a) ⫹ a2(1 ⫺ a) ⫺ S 3                   (5.128)
                        WL

where M FL is the fixed-end moment at the left support and M FR at the right support.
   As an example of the use of the curves, find the fixed-end moments in a pris-
matic beam of 20-ft span carrying a triangular loading of 100 kips, similar to the
loading shown in Case 4, Fig. 5.70, distributed over the entire span, with the max-
imum intensity at the right support.




FIGURE 5.70 Characteristics of loadings.
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.87




  FIGURE 5.71 Chart for fixed-end moments due to any type of loading.



   Case 4 gives the characteristics of the loading: y ⫽ 1; the center of gravity is
0.33L from the right support, so a ⫽ 0.667; G 2 ⫽ 1⁄18 ⫽ 0.056; and S 3 ⫽ ⫺1⁄135 ⫽
⫺0.007. To find M FR, enter Fig. 5.71 with a ⫽ 0.67 on the upper scale at the bottom
of the diagram, and proceed vertically to the estimated location of the intersection
of the coordinate with the G 2 ⫽ 0.06 curve. Then, move horizontally to the inter-
section with the line for S 3 ⫽ ⫺0.007, as indicated by the dash line in Fig. 5.71.
Referring to the scale at the top of the diagram, find the coefficient mR to be 0.10.
Similarly, with a ⫽ 0.67 on the lowest scale, find the coefficient mL to be 0.07.
Hence, the fixed-end moment at the right support is 0.10 ⫻ 100 ⫻ 20 ⫽ 200 ft-
kips, and at the left support ⫺0.07 ⫻ 100 ⫻ 20 ⫽ ⫺140 ft-kips.


5.11.5   Slope-Deflection Equations

In Arts. 5.11.2 and 5.11.4, moments and displacements in a member of a continuous
beam or frame are obtained by addition of their simple-beam components. Similarly,
moments and displacements can be determined by superposition of fixed-end-beam
components. This method, for example, can be used to derive relationships between
end moments and end rotations of a beam known as slope-deflection equations.
These equations can be used to compute end moments in continuous beams.
   Consider a member LR of a continuous beam or frame (Fig. 5.72). LR may have
a moment of inertia that varies along its length. The support R is displaced vertically




               FIGURE 5.72 Elastic curve for a span LR of a continuous
               beam subjected to end moments and displacement of one end.
5.88                                  SECTION FIVE


downward a distance d from its original position. Because of this and the loads on
the member and adjacent members, LR is subjected to end moments ML are so
small that the member can be considered to rotate clockwise through an angle
nearly equal to d / L, where L is the span of the beam.
   Assume that rotation is prevented at ends L and R by end moments mL at L and
mR at R. Then, by application of the principle of superposition (Art. 5.10.6) and
Eqs. (5.122) and (5.123),

                                                          d
                              mL ⫽ M FL ⫺ KL (1 ⫹ CR)                          (5.129)
                                                          L
                                                          d
                              mR ⫽ M FR ⫺ KR (1 ⫹ CL )                         (5.130)
                                                          L

where M FL   ⫽   fixed-end moment at L due to the load on LR
      M FR   ⫽   fixed-end moment at R due to the load on LR
      KL     ⫽   fixed-end stiffness at end L
      KR     ⫽   fixed-end stiffness at end R
      CL     ⫽   carry-over factor toward end L
      CR     ⫽   carry-over factor toward end R

   Since ends L and R are not fixed but actually undergo angle changes ␪L and ␪R
at L and R, respectively, the joints must now be permitted to rotate while an end
moment M ⬘L is applied at L and an end moment M ⬘R at R to produce those angle
changes (Fig. 5.73). With the use of the definitions of carry-over factor (Art. 5.11.2)
and fixed-end stiffness (Art. 5.11.3), these moments are found to be

                                 M ⬘L ⫽ KL(␪L ⫹ CR␪R)                          (5.131)

                                 M ⬘R ⫽ KR(␪R ⫹ CL␪L )                         (5.132)

The slope-deflection equations for LR then result from addition of M ⬘L to mL, which
yields ML, and of M ⬘R to mR, which yields MR:

                                                                       d
                     ML ⫽ KL(␪L ⫹ CR␪R) ⫹ M LF ⫺ KL (1 ⫹ CR)                   (5.133)
                                                                       L
                                                                   d
                     MR ⫽ KR(␪R ⫹ CL␪L ) ⫹ M FR ⫺ KR(1 ⫹ CL )                  (5.134)
                                                                   L

  For beams with constant moment of inertia, the slope-deflection equations be-
come




                      FIGURE 5.73 Elastic curve for a simple beam LR
                      subjected to end moments.
                               STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.89



                     ML ⫽
                            4EI
                             L  冉   1
                                            冊
                                ␪L ⫹ ␪R ⫹ M LF ⫺
                                    2
                                                 6EI d
                                                  L L
                                                                            (5.135)


                     MR ⫽
                            4EI
                             L  冉   1
                                            冊
                                ␪R ⫹ ␪L ⫹ M FR ⫺
                                    2
                                                 6EI d
                                                  L L
                                                                            (5.136)

where E ⫽ modulus of elasticity
      I ⫽ moment of inertia of the cross section
   Note that if end L moves downward with respect to R, the sign for d in the
preceding equations is changed.
   If the end moments ML and MR are known and the end rotations are to be
determined, Eqs. (5.131) to (5.134) can be solved for ␪L and ␪R or derived by
superposition of simple-beam components, as is done in Art. 5.11.4. For beams
with moment of inertia varying along the span:
                                                              d
                    ␪L ⫽ (ML ⫺ M LF ) ␣L ⫺ (MR ⫺ M RF ) ␤ ⫹                 (5.137)
                                                              L
                                                              d
                    ␪R ⫽ (MR ⫺ M RF ) ␣R ⫺ (ML ⫺ M LF ) ␤ ⫹                 (5.138)
                                                              L
where ␣ is given by Eq. (5.105) and ␤ by Eq. (5.106). For beams with constant
moment of inertia:
                          L                L               d
                  ␪L ⫽      (M ⫺ M LF ) ⫺    (M ⫺ M RF ) ⫹                  (5.139)
                         3EI L            6EI R            L
                          L                L               d
                  ␪R ⫽      (M ⫺ M RF ) ⫺    (M ⫺ M LF ) ⫹                  (5.140)
                         3EI R            6EI L            L
    The slope-deflection equations can be used to determine end moments and ro-
tations of the spans of continuous beams by writing compatibility and equilibrium
equations for the conditions at each support. For example, the sum of the moments
at each support must be zero. Also, because of continuity, the member must rotate
through the same angle on both sides of every support. Hence, ML for one span,
given by Eq. (5.133) or (5.135), must be equal to ⫺MR for the adjoining span,
given by Eq. (5.134) or (5.136), and the end rotation ␪ at that support must be the
same on both sides of the equation. One such equation with the end rotations at
the supports as the unknowns can be written for each support. With the end rotations
determined by simultaneous solution of the equations, the end moments can be
computed from the slope-deflection equations and the continuous beam can now
be treated as statically determinate.
    See also Arts. 5.11.9 and 5.13.2.
    (C. H. Norris et al., ‘‘Elementary Structural Analysis,’’ 4th ed., McGraw-Hill
Book Company, New York.)


5.11.6   Moment Distribution

The frame in Fig. 5.74 consists of four prismatic members rigidly connected to-
gether at O at fixed at ends A, B, C, and D. If an external moment U is applied at
5.90                                 SECTION FIVE


O, the sum of the end moments in each member at O must be equal to U. Fur-
thermore, all members must rotate at O through the same angle ␪, since they are
assumed to be rigidly connected there. Hence, by the definition of fixed-end stiff-
ness, the proportion of U induced in the end of each member at O is equal to the
ratio of the stiffness of that member to the sum of the stiffnesses of all the members
at the joint (Art. 5.11.3).
                                                  Suppose a moment of 100 ft-kips is
                                             applied at O, as indicated in Fig. 5.74b.
                                             The relative stiffness (or I / L) is assumed
                                             as shown in the circle on each member.
                                             The distribution factors for the moment
                                             at O are computed from the stiffnesses
                                             and shown in the boxes. For example,
                                             the distribution factor for OA equals its
                                             stiffness divided by the sum of the stiff-
                                             nesses of all the members at the joint:
                                             3 / (3 ⫹ 2 ⫹ 4 ⫹ 1) ⫽ 0.3. Hence, the
                                             moment induced in OA at O is 0.3 ⫻
                                             100 ⫽ 30 ft-kips. Similarly, OB gets 10
                                             ft-kips, OC 40 ft-kips and OD 20 ft-
                                             kips.
                                                  Because the far ends of these mem-
                                             bers are fixed, one-half of these mo-
                                             ments are carried over to them (Art.
                                             5.11.2). Thus MAO ⫽ 0.5 ⫻ 30 ⫽ 15;
                                             MBO ⫽ 0.5 ⫻ 10 ⫽ 5; MCO ⫽ 0.5 ⫻
                                             40 ⫽ 20; and MDO ⫽ 0.5 ⫻ 20 ⫽ 10.
                                                  Most structures consist of frames
                                             similar to the one in Fig. 5.74, or even
                                             simpler, joined together. Though the
FIGURE 5.74 Effect of an unbalanced mo- ends of the members are not fixed, the
ment at a joint in a frame.                  technique employed for the frame in
                                             Fig. 5.74b can be applied to find end
moments in such continuous structures.
    Before the general method is presented, one short cut is worth noting. Advantage
can be taken when a member has a hinged end to reduce the work of distributing
moments. This is done by using the true stiffness of a member instead of the fixed-
end stiffness. (For a prismatic beam with one end hinged, the stiffness is three-
fourth the fixed-end stiffness; for a beam with variable I, it is equal to the fixed-
end stiffness times 1 ⫺ CLCR, where CL and CR are the carry-over factors for the
beam.) Naturally, the carry-over factor toward the hinge is zero.
    When a joint is neither fixed nor pinned but is restrained by elastic members
connected there, moments can be distributed by a series of converging approxi-
mations. All joints are locked against rotation. As a result, the loads will create
fixed-end moments at the ends of every member. At each joint, a moment equal to
the algebraic sum of the fixed-end moments there is required to hold it fixed. Then,
one joint is unlocked at a time by applying a moment equal but opposite in sign
to the moment that was needed to prevent rotation. The unlocking moment must
be distributed to the members at the joint in proportion to their fixed-end stiffnesses
and the distributed moments carried over to the far ends.
    After all joints have been released at least once, it generally will be necessary
to repeat the process—sometimes several times—before the corrections to the fixed-
                               STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.91


end moments become negligible. To reduce the number of cycles, the unlocking of
joints should start with those having the greatest unbalanced moments.
    Suppose the end moments are to be found for the prismatic continuous beam
ABCD in Fig. 5.75. The I / L values for all spans are equal; therefore, the relative
fixed-end stiffness for all members is unity. However, since A is a hinged end, the
computation can be shortened by using the actual relative stiffness, which is 3⁄4.
Relative stiffnesses for all members are shown in the circle on each member. The
distribution factors are shown in boxes at each joint.
    The computation starts with determination of fixed-end moments for each mem-
ber (Art. 5.11.4). These are assumed to have been found and are given on the first
line in Fig. 5.75. The greatest unbalanced moment is found from inspection to be
at hinged end A; so this joint is unlocked first. Since there are no other members
at the joint, the full unlocking moment of ⫹400 is distributed to AB at A and one-
half of this is carried over to B. The unbalance at B now is ⫹400 ⫺ 480 plus the
carry-over of ⫹200 from A, or a total of ⫹120. Hence, a moment of ⫺120 must
be applied and distributed to the members at B by multiplying by the distribution
factors in the corresponding boxes.
    The net moment at B could be found now by adding the entries for each member
at the joint. However, it generally is more convenient to delay the summation until
the last cycle of distribution has been completed.
    The moment distributed to BA need not be carried over to A, because the carry-
over factor toward the hinged end is zero. However, half the moment distributed to
BC is carried over to C.
    Similarly, joint C is unlocked and half the distributed moments carried over to
B and D, respectively. Joint D should not be unlocked, since it actually is a fixed
end. Thus, the first cycle of moment distribution has been completed.
    The second cycle is carried out in the same manner. Joint B is released, and the
distributed moment in BC is carried over to C. Finally, C is unlocked, to complete
the cycle. Adding the entries for the end of each member yields the final moments.


5.11.7   Maximum Moments in Continuous Frames

In design of continuous frames, one objective is to find the maximum end moments
and interior moments produced by the worst combination of loading. For maximum
moment at the end of a beam, live load should be placed on that beam and on the




         FIGURE 5.75 Moment distribution by converging approximations for a
         continuous beam.
5.92                                 SECTION FIVE


beam adjoining the end for which the moment is to be computed. Spans adjoining
these two should be assumed to be carrying only dead load.
   For maximum midspan moments, the beam under consideration should be fully
loaded, but adjoining spans should be assumed to be carrying only dead load.
   The work involved in distributing moments due to dead and live loads in con-
tinuous frames in buildings can be greatly simplified by isolating each floor. The
tops of the upper columns and the bottoms of the lower columns can be assumed
fixed. Furthermore, the computations can be condensed considerably by following
the procedure recommended in ‘‘Continuity in Concrete Building Frames.’’
EB033D, Portland Cement Association, Skokie, IL 60077, and indicated in Fig.
5.74.
   Figure 5.74 presents the complete calculation for maximum end and midspan
moments in four floor beams AB, BC, CD, and DE. Building columns are assumed
to be fixed at the story above and below. None of the beam or column sections is
known to begin with; so as a start, all members will be assumed to have a fixed-
end stiffness of unity, as indicated on the first line of the calculation.
   On the second line, the distribution factors for each end of the beams are shown,
calculated from the stiffnesses (Arts. 5.11.3 and 5.11.4). Column stiffnesses are not
shown, because column moments will not be computed until moment distribution
to the beams has been completed. Then the sum of the column moments at each
joint may be easily computed, since they are the moments needed to make the sum
of the end moments at the joint equal to zero. The sum of the column moments at
each joint can then be distributed to each column there in proportion to its stiffness.
In this example, each column will get one-half the sum of the column moments.
   Fixed-end moments at each beam end for dead load are shown on the third line,
just above the heavy line, and fixed-end moments for live plus dead load on the
fourth line. Corresponding midspan moments for the fixed-end condition also are
shown on the fourth line and, like the end moments, will be corrected to yield
actual midspan moments.
   For maximum end moment at A, beam AB must be fully loaded, but BC should
carry dead load only. Holding A fixed, we first unlock joint B, which has a total-
load fixed-end moment of ⫹172 in BA and a dead-load fixed-end moment of ⫺37
in BC. The releasing moment required, therefore, is ⫺(172 ⫺ 37), or ⫺ 135. When
B is released, a moment of ⫺135 ⫻ 1⁄4 is distributed to BA One-half of this is
carried over to A, or ⫺135 ⫻ 1⁄4 ⫻ 1⁄2 ⫽ ⫺17. This value is entered as the carry-
over at A on the fifth line in Fig. 5.76. Joint B is then relocked.




FIGURE 5.76 Bending moments in a continuous frame obtained by moment distribution.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.93


    At A, for which we are computing the maximum moment, we have a total-load
fixed-end moment of ⫺172 and a carry-over of ⫺17, making the total ⫺189, shown
on the sixth line. To release A, a moment of ⫹189 must be applied to the joint. Of
this, 189 ⫻ 1⁄3, or 63, is distributed to AB, as indicated on the seventh line of the
calculation. Finally, the maximum moment at A is found by adding lines 6 and 7:
⫺189 ⫹ 63 ⫽ ⫺126.
    For maximum moment at B, both AB and BC must be fully loaded but CD
should carry only dead load. We begin the determination of the moment at B by
first releasing joints A and C, for which the corresponding carry-over moments at
BA and BC are ⫹29 and ⫺(⫹78 ⫺ 70) ⫻ 1⁄4 ⫻ 1⁄2 ⫽ ⫺1, shown on the fifth line
in Fig. 5.76. These bring the total fixed-end moments in BA and BC to ⫹201 and
⫺79, respectively. The releasing moment required is ⫺(201 ⫺ 79) ⫽ ⫺122. Mul-
tiplying this by the distribution factors for BA and BC when joint B is released, we
find the distributed moments, ⫺30, entered on line 7. The maximum end moments
finally are obtained by adding lines 6 and 7: ⫹171 at BA and ⫺109 at BC. Maxi-
mum moments at C, D, and E are computed and entered in Fig. 5.76 in a similar
manner. This procedure is equivalent to two cycles of moment distribution.
    The computation of maximum midspan moments in Fig. 5.76 is based on the
assumption that in each beam the midspan moment is the sum of the simple-beam
midspan moment and one-half the algebraic difference of the final end moments
(the span carries full load but adjacent spans only dead load). Instead of starting
with the simple-beam moment, however, we begin with the midspan moment for
the fixed-end condition and apply two corrections. In each span, these corrections
are equal to the carry-over moments entered on line 5 for the two ends of the beam
multiplied by a factor.
    For beams with variable moment of inertia, the factor is ⫹1⁄2[(1 / C F ) ⫹ D ⫺ 1]
where C F is the fixed-end-carry-over factor toward the end for which the correction
factor is being computed and D is the distribution factor for that end. The plus sign
is used for correcting the carry-over at the right end of a beam, and the minus sign
for the carry-over at the left end. For prismatic beams, the correction factor becomes
1⁄2(1 ⫹ D).
    For example, to find the corrections to the midspan moment in AB, we first
multiply the carry-over at A on line 5, ⫺17, by ⫺1⁄2(1 ⫹ 1⁄3). The correction, ⫹11,
is also entered on the fifth line. Then, we multiply the carry-over at B, ⫹ 29, by
⫹1⁄2(1 ⫹ 1⁄4) and enter the correction, ⫹18, on line 6. The final midspan moment
is the sum of lines 4, 5, and 6: ⫹99 ⫹ 11 ⫹ 18 ⫽ ⫹128. Other midspan moments
in Fig. 5.74 are obtained in a similar manner.
    See also Arts. 5.11.9 and 5.11.10.


5.11.8   Moment-Influence Factors

In certain types of framing, particularly those in which different types of loading
conditions must be investigated, it may be convenient to find maximum end mo-
ments from a table of moment-influence factors. This table is made up by listing
for the end of each member in the structure the moment induced in that end when
a moment (for convenience, ⫹1000) is applied to every joint successively. Once
this table has been prepared, no additional moment distribution is necessary for
computing the end moments due to any loading condition.
   For a specific loading pattern, the moment at any beam end MAB may be obtained
from the moment-influence table by multiplying the entries under AB for the various
5.94                                   SECTION FIVE


joints by the actual unbalanced moments at those joints divided by 1000, and sum-
ming (see also Art. 5.11.9 and Table 5.6).


5.11.9   Procedure for Sidesway

Computations of moments due to sidesway, or drift, in rigid frames is conveniently
executed by the following method:
1. Apply forces to the structure to prevent sidesway while the fixed-end moments
   due to loads are distributed.
2. Compute the moments due to these forces.
3. Combine the moments obtained in Steps 1 and 2 to eliminate the effect of the
   forces that prevented sidesway.
                                                Suppose the rigid frame in Fig. 5.77
                                            is subjected to a 2000-lb horizontal load
                                            acting to the right at the level of beam
                                            BC. The first step is to compute the mo-
                                            ment-influence factors (Table 5.6) by
                                            applying moments of ⫹1000 at joints B
                                            and C, assuming sidesway prevented.
                                                Since there are no intermediate loads
                                            on the beams and columns, the only
                                            fixed-end moments that need be consid-
                                            ered are those in the columns resulting
                                            from lateral deflection of the frame
                                            caused by the horizontal load. This de-
                                            flection, however is not known initially.
FIGURE 5.77 Rigid frame.                    So assume an arbitrary deflection, which
                                            produces a fixed-end moment of
⫺1000M at the top of column CD. M is an unknown constant to be determined
from the fact that the sum of the shears in the deflected columns must be equal to
the 2000-lb load. The same deflection also produces a moment of ⫺1000M at the
bottom of CD [see Eq. (5.126)].
   From the geometry of the structure, furthermore, note that the deflection of B
relative to A is equal to the deflection of C relative to D. Then, according to Eq.
(5.126) the fixed-end moments in the columns are proportional to the stiffnesses of


                       TABLE 5.6 Moment-Influence Factors
                       for Fig. 5.77

                       Member          ⫹1000 at B     ⫹1000 at C
                         AB               351           ⫺105
                         BA               702           ⫺210
                         BC               298             210
                         CB                70             579
                         CD               ⫺70             421
                         DC               ⫺35             210
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.95


the columns and hence are equal in AB to ⫺1000M ⫻ 6⁄2 ⫽ ⫺3000M. The column
fixed-end moments are entered in the first line of Table 5.7, which is called a
moment-collection table.
   In the deflected position of the frame, joints B and C are unlocked. First, apply
a releasing moment of ⫹3000M at B and distribute it by multiplying by 3 the
entries in the column marked ‘‘⫹1000 at B’’ in Table 5.6. Similarly, a releasing
moment of ⫹1000M is applied at C and distributed with the aid of Table 5.6. The
distributed moments are entered in the second and third lines of Table 5.7. The
final moments are the sum of the fixed-end moments and the distributed moments
and are given in the fifth line.
   Isolating each column and taking moments about one end, we find that the
overturning moment due to the shear is equal to the sum of the end moments. There
is one such equation for each column. Addition of these equations, noting that the
sum of the shears equals 2000 lb, yields
                 ⫺M(2052 ⫹ 1104 ⫹ 789 ⫹ 895) ⫽ ⫺2000 ⫻ 20
from which M ⫽ 8.26. This value is substituted in the sidesway totals in Table 5.7
to yield the end moments for the 2000-lb horizontal load.
   Suppose now a vertical load of 4000 lb is applied to BC of the rigid frame in
Fig. 5.77, 5 ft from B. Tables 5.6 and 5.7 can again be used to determine the end
moments with a minimum of labor:
   The fixed-end moment at B, with sidesway prevented, is ⫺12,800, and at C ⫹
3200. With the joints locked, the frame is permitted to move laterally an arbitrary
amount, so that in addition to the fixed-end moments due to the 4000-lb load,
column fixed-end moments of ⫺3000M at B and ⫺ 1000M at C are induced. Table
5.7 already indicates the effect of relieving these column moments by unlocking
joints B and C. We now have to superimpose the effect of releasing joints B and
C to relieve the fixed-end moments for the vertical load. This we can do with the
aid of Table 5.6. The distribution is shown in the lower part of Table 5.7. The sums
of the fixed-end moments and distributed moments for the 4000-lb load are shown
on the line ‘‘No-sidesway sum.’’
   The unknown M can be evaluated from the fact that the sum of the horizontal
forces acting on the columns must be zero. This is equivalent to requiring that the
sum of the column end moments equals zero:
     ⫺M(2052 ⫹ 1104 ⫹ 789 ⫹ 895) ⫹ 4826 ⫹ 9652 ⫺ 2244 ⫺ 1120 ⫽ 0
from which M ⫽ 2.30. This value is substituted in the sidesway total in Table 5.7
to yield the sidesway moments for the 4000-lb load. The addition of these moments
to the totals for no sidesway yields the final moments.
   This procedure enables one-story bents with straight beams to be analyzed with
the necessity of solving only one equation with one unknown regardless of the
number of bays. If the frame is several stories high, the procedure can be applied
to each story. Since an arbitrary horizontal deflection is introduced at each floor or
roof level, there are as many unknowns and equations as there are stories.
   The procedure is more difficult to apply to bents with curved or polygonal
members between the columns. The effect of the change in the horizontal projection
of the curved or polygonal portion of the bent must be included in the calculations.
In many cases, it may be easier to analyze the bent as a curved beam (arch).
   (A. Kleinlogel, ‘‘Rigid Frame Formulas,’’ Frederick Ungar Publishing Co., New
York.)
TABLE 5.7 Moment-Collection Table for Fig. 5.77

                              AB                     BA                     BC                    CB                  CD                   DC
       Remarks         ⫹            ⫺         ⫹             ⫺        ⫹             ⫺        ⫹           ⫺      ⫹            ⫺        ⫹          ⫺
Sidesway, FEM                      3,000M                 3,000M                                                           1,000M           1,000M
  B moments          1,053M                 2,106M                   894M                   210M                             210M             105M
  C moments                       105M                      210M     210M                   579M               421M                 210M
  Partial sum        1,053M     3,105M      2,106M        3,210M   1,104M                   789M               421M     1,210M      210M    1,105M
  Totals                        2,052M                    1,104M   1,104M                   789M                          789M                895M
  For 2000-lb load             17,000                     9,100    9,100                  6,500                        6,500                7,400
4000-lb load, FEM                                                                12,800   3,200
  B moments          4,490                  8,980                  3,820                    897                          897                  448
  C moments            336                    672                                   672                1,853           1,347                  672
  Partial sum        4,826                  9,652                  3,820         13,472   4,097        1,853           2,244                1,120
No-sidesway sum      4,826                  9,652                                 9,652   2,244                        2,244                1,120
  Sidesway M                   4,710                      2,540    2,540                  1,810                        1,810                2,060
     Totals           120                   7,110                                 7,110   4,050                        4,050                3,180
5.96
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.97


5.11.10   Rapid Approximate Analysis of Multistory Frames

Exact analysis of multistory rigid frames subjected to lateral forces, such as those
from wind or earthquakes, involves lengthy calculations, and they are time-
consuming and expensive, even when performed with computers. Hence, approxi-
mate methods of analysis are an alternative, at least for preliminary designs and,
for some structures, for final designs.
   It is noteworthy that for some buildings even the ‘‘exact’’ methods, such as those
described in Arts. 5.11.8 and 5.11.9, are not exact. Usually, static horizontal loads
are assumed for design purposes, but actually the forces exerted by wind and earth-
quakes are dynamic. In addition, these forces generally are uncertain in intensity,
direction, and duration. Earthquake forces, usually assumed as a percentage of the
mass of the building above each level, act at the base of the structure, not at each
floor level as is assumed in design, and accelerations at each level vary nearly
linearly with distance above the base. Also, at the beginning of a design, the sizes
of the members are not known. Consequently, the exact resistance to lateral defor-
mation cannot be calculated. Furthermore, floors, walls, and partitions help resist
the lateral forces in a very uncertain way. See Art. 5.12 for a method of calculating
the distribution of loads to rigid-frame bents.

Portal Method. Since an exact analysis is impossible, most designers prefer a
wind-analysis method based on reasonable assumptions and requiring a minimum
of calculations. One such method is the so-called ‘‘portal method.’’
    It is based on the assumptions that points of inflection (zero bending moment)
occur at the midpoints of all members and that exterior columns take half as much
shear as do interior columns. These assumptions enable all moments and shears
throughout the building frame to be computed by the laws of equilibrium.
    Consider, for example, the roof level (Fig. 5.78a) of a tall building. A wind load
of 600 lb is assumed to act along the top line of girders. To apply the portal method,
we cut the building along a section through the inflection points of the top-story
columns, which are assumed to be at the column midpoints, 6 ft down from the
top of the building. We need now consider only the portion of the structure above
this section.
    Since the exterior columns take only half as much shear as do the interior col-
umns, they each receive 100 lb, and the two interior columns, 200 lb. The moments
at the tops of the columns equal these shears times the distance to the inflection
point. The wall end of the end girder carries a moment equal to the moment in the
column. (At the floor level below, as indicated in Fig. 5.78b, that end of the end
girder carries a moment equal to the sum of the column moments.) Since the
inflection point is at the midpoint of the girder, the moment at the inner end of the
girder must the same as at the outer end. The moment in the adjoining girder can
be found by subtracting this moment from the column moment, because the sum
of the moments at the joint must be zero. (At the floor level below, as shown in
Fig. 5.78b, the moment in the interior girder is found by subtracting the moment
in the exterior girder from the sum of the column moments.)
    Girder shears then can be computed by dividing girder moments by the half
span. When these shears have been found, column loads can be easily computed
from the fact that the sum of the vertical loads must be zero, by taking a section
around each joint through column and girder inflection points. As a check, it should
be noted that the column loads produce a moment that must be equal to the mo-
ments of the wind loads above the section for which the column loads were com-
puted. For the roof level (Fig. 5.78a), for example, ⫺50 ⫻ 24 ⫹ 100 ⫻ 48 ⫽
600 ⫻ 6.
5.98                                  SECTION FIVE




   FIGURE 5.78 Portal method for computing wind stresses in a tall building.



Cantilever Method. Another wind-analysis procedure that is sometimes employed
is the cantilever method. Basic assumptions here are that inflection points are at
the midpoints of all members and that direct stresses in the columns vary as the
distances of the columns from the center of gravity of the bent. The assumptions
are sufficient to enable shears and moments in the frame to be determined from the
laws of equilibrium.
    For multistory buildings with height-to-width ratio of 4 or more, the Spurr mod-
ification is recommended (‘‘Welded Tier Buildings,’’ U.S. Steel Corp.). In this
method, the moments of inertia of the girders at each level are made proportional
to the girder shears.
    The results obtained from the cantilever method generally will be different from
those obtained by the portal method. In general, neither solution is correct, but the
answers provide a reasonable estimate of the resistance to be provided against
lateral deformation. (See also Transactions of the ASCE, Vol. 105, pp. 1713–1739,
1940.)


5.11.11   Beams Stressed into the Plastic Range

When an elastic material, such as structural steel, is loaded in tension with a grad-
ually increasing load, stresses are proportional to strains up to the proportional limit
(near the yield point). If the material, like steel, also is ductile, then it continues to
carry load beyond the yield point, though strains increase rapidly with little increase
in load (Fig. 5.79a).
                                       STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.99


   Similarly, a beam made of a ductile material continues to carry more load after
the stresses in the outer surfaces reach the yield point. However, the stresses will
no longer vary with distance from the neutral axis, so the flexure formula [Eq.
(5.54)] no longer holds. However, if simplifying assumptions are made, approxi-
mating the stress-strain relationship beyond the elastic limit, the load-carrying ca-
pacity of the beam can be computed with satisfactory accuracy.
                                                Modulus of rupture is defined as
                                            the stress computed from the flexure
                                            formula for the maximum bending mo-
                                            ment a beam sustains at failure. This is
                                            not a true stress but it is sometimes used
                                            to compare the strength of beams.
                                                For a ductile material, the idealized
                                            stress-strain relationship in Fig. 5.79b
                                            may be assumed. Stress is proportional
                                            to strain until the yield-point stress ƒy is
                                            reached, after which strain increases at
                                            a constant stress.
                                                For a beam of this material, the fol-
                                            lowing assumptions will also be made:

                                                      1. Plane sections remain plane, strains
                                                         thus being proportional to distance
                                                         from the neutral axis.
                                                      2. Properties of the material in tension
                                                         are the same as those in compression.
FIGURE 5.79 Stress-strain relationship for a          3. Its fibers behave the same in flexure
ductile material generally is similar to the curve
shown in (a). To simplify plastic analysis, the
                                                         as in tension.
portion of (a) enclosed by the dash lines is ap-      4. Deformations remain small.
proximated by the curve in (b), which extends
to the range where strain hardening begins.        Strain distribution across the cross
                                               section of a rectangular beam, based on
these assumptions, is shown in Fig. 5.80a. At the yield point, the unit strain is ⑀y
and the curvature ␾y, as indicated in (1). In (2), the strain has increased several
times, but the section still remains plane. Finally, at failure, (3), the strains are very
large and nearly constant across upper and lower halves of the section.
   Corresponding stress distributions are shown in Fig. 5.80b. At the yield point,
(1), stresses vary linearly and the maximum if ƒy . With increase in load, more and
more fibers reach the yield point, and the stress distribution becomes nearly con-
stant, as indicated in (2). Finally, at failure, (3), the stresses are constant across the
top and bottom parts of the section and equal to the yield-point stress.
   The resisting moment at failure for a rectangular beam can be computed from
the stress diagram for stage 3. If b is the width of the member and d its depth, then
the ultimate moment for a rectangular beam is

                                                     bd 2
                                            Mp ⫽          ƒ                           (5.141)
                                                      4 y

Since the resisting moment at stage 1 is My ⫽ ƒy bd 2 / 6, the beam carries 50% more
moment before failure than when the yield-point stress is first reached at the outer
surfaces.
5.100                                    SECTION FIVE




         FIGURE 5.80 Strain distribution is shown in (a) and stress distribution in
         (b) for a cross section of a beam as it is loaded beyond the yield point, for
         the idealized stress-strain relationship in Fig. 5.79b: stage (1) shows the con-
         dition at the yield point of the outer surface; (2) after yielding starts; (3) at
         ultimate load.



   A circular section has an Mp / My ratio of about 1.7, while a diamond section has
a ratio of 2. The average wide-flange rolled-steel beam has a ratio of about 1.14.

Plastic Hinges. The relationship between moment and curvature in a beam can
be assumed to be similar to the stress-strain relationship in Fig. 5.80b. Curvature
␾ varies linearly with moment until My ⫽ Mp is reached, after which ␾ increases
indefinitely at constant moment. That is, a plastic hinge forms.

Moment Redistribution. This ability of a ductile beam to form plastic hinges
enables a fixed-end or continuous beam to carry more load after MP occurs at a
section, because a redistribution of moments takes place. Consider, for example, a
uniformly loaded, fixed-end, prismatic beam. In the elastic range, the end moments
of ML ⫽ MR ⫽ WL / 12, while the midspan moment MC is WL / 24. The load when
the yield point is reached at the outer surfaces at the beam ends is Wy ⫽ 12My / L.
Under this load the moment capacity of the ends of the beam is nearly exhausted;
plastic hinges form there when the moment equals MP. As load is increased, the
ends then rotate under constant moment and the beam deflects like a simply sup-
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.101


ported beam. The moment at midspan increases until the moment capacity at that
section is exhausted and a plastic hinge forms. The load causing that condition is
the ultimate load Wu since, with three hinges in the span, a link mechanism is
formed and the member continues to deform at constant load. At the time the third
hinge is formed, the moments at ends and center are all equal to MP. Therefore,
for equilibrium, 2MP ⫽ WuL / 8, from which Wu ⫽ 16MP / L. Since for the idealized
moment-curvature relationship, MP was assumed equal to My , the carrying capacity
due to redistribution of moments is 33% greater than Wy .



5.12     LOAD DISTRIBUTION TO BENTS AND
         SHEAR WALLS

Buildings must be designed to resist horizontal forces as well as vertical loads. In
tall buildings, the lateral forces must be given particular attention, because if they
are not properly provided for, they can collapse the structure (Art. 3.2.3). The usual
procedure for preventing such disasters is to provide structural framing capable of
transmitting the horizontal forces from points of application to the building foun-
dations.
    Because the horizontal loads may come from any direction, they generally are
resolved into perpendicular components, and correspondingly the lateral-force-
resisting framing is also placed in perpendicular directions. The maximum magni-
tude of load is assumed to act in each of those directions. Bents or shear walls,
which act as vertical cantilevers and generally are often also used to support some
of the building’s gravity loads, usually are spaced at appropriate intervals for trans-
mitting the loads to the foundations.
    A bent consists of vertical trusses or continuous rigid frames located in a plane.
The trusses usually are an assemblage of columns, horizontal girders, and diagonal
bracing (Art. 3.2.4). The rigid frames are composed of girders and columns, with
so-called wind connections between them to establish continuity. Shear walls are
thin cantilevers braced by floors and roofs (Art. 3.2.4).


5.12.1   Diaphragms

Horizontal distribution of lateral forces to bents and shear walls is achieved by the
floor and roof systems acting as diaphragms (Fig. 5.81).
    To qualify as a diaphragm, a floor or roof system must be able to transmit the
lateral forces to bents and shear walls without exceeding a horizontal deflection
that would cause distress to any vertical element. The successful action of a dia-
phragm also requires that it be properly tied into the supporting framing. Designers
should ensure this action by appropriate detailing at the juncture between horizontal
and vertical structural elements of the building.
    Diaphragms may be considered analogous to horizontal (or inclined, in the case
of some roofs) plate girders. The roof or floor slab constitutes the web; the joists,
beams, and girders function as stiffeners; and the bents and shear walls act as
flanges.
    Diaphragms may be constructed of structural materials, such as concrete, wood,
or metal in various forms. Combinations of such materials are also possible. Where
a diaphragm is made up of units, such as plywood, precast-concrete planks, or steel
5.102                                SECTION FIVE




                   FIGURE 5.81 Floors of building distribute horizon-
                   tal loads to shear walls (diaphragm action).



decking, its characteristics are, to a large degree, dependent on the attachments of
one unit to another and to the supporting members. Such attachments must resist
shearing stresses due to internal translational and rotational actions.
   The stiffness of a horizontal diaphragm affects the distribution of the lateral
forces to the bents and shear walls. For the purpose of analysis, diaphragms may
be classified into three groups—rigid, semirigid or semiflexible, and flexible—
although no diaphragm is actually infinitely rigid or infinitely flexible.
   A rigid diaphragm is assumed to distribute horizontal forces to the vertical
resisting elements in proportion to the relative rigidities of these elements (Fig.
5.82).
   Semirigid or semiflexible diaphragms are diaphragms that deflect significantly
under load, but have sufficient stiffness to distribute a portion of the load to the
vertical elements in proportion to the rigidities of these elements. The action is
analogous to a continuous beam of appreciable stiffness on yielding supports (Fig.
5.83). Diaphragm reactions are dependent on the relative stiffnesses of diaphragm
and vertical resisting elements.
   A flexible diaphragm is analogous to a continuous beam or series of simple
beams spanning between nondeflecting supports. Thus, a flexible diaphragm is con-




             FIGURE 5.82 Horizontal section through shear walls connected
             by a rigid diaphragm. R ⫽ relative rigidity and ⌬v ⫽ shear-wall
             deflection.
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.103




             FIGURE 5.83 Horizontal sections through shear walls connected
             by a semirigid diaphragm. ⌬D ⫽ diaphragm horizontal deflection.



sidered to distribute the lateral forces to the vertical resisting elements in proportion
to the exterior-wall tributary areas (Fig. 5.84).
   A rigorous analysis of lateral-load distribution to shear walls or bents is some-
times very time-consuming, and frequently unjustified by the results. Therefore, in
many cases, a design based on reasonable limits may be used. For example, the
load may be distributed by first considering the diaphragm rigid, and then by con-
sidering it flexible. If the difference in results is not great, the shear walls can then
be safely designed for the maximum applied load. (See also Art. 5.12.2.)


5.12.2   Torque Distribution to Shear Walls

When the line of action of the resultant of lateral forces acting on a building does
not pass through the center of rigidity of a vertical, lateral-force-resisting system,
distribution of the rotational forces must be considered as well as distribution of
the transnational forces. If rigid or semirigid diaphragms are used, the designer may
assume that torsional forces are distributed to the shear walls in proportion to their
relative rigidities and their distances from the center of rigidity. A flexible dia-
phragm should not be considered capable of distributing torsional forces.




             FIGURE 5.84 Horizontal section through shear walls connected by
             a flexible diaphragm.
5.104                                 SECTION FIVE


   See also Art. 5.12.5.

Example of Torque Distribution to Shear Walls. To illustrate load-distribution
calculations for shear walls with rigid or semirigid diaphragms, Fig. 5.85 shows a
horizontal section through three shear walls A, B, and C taken above a rigid floor.
Wall B is 16 ft from wall A, and 24 ft from wall C. Rigidity of A 0.33, of B 0.22,
and of C 0.45 (Art. 5.12.5). A 20-kip horizontal force acts at floor level parallel to
the shear walls and midway between A and C.
                                                The center of rigidity of the shear
                                            walls is located, relative to wall A, by
                                            taking moments about A of the wall ri-
                                            gidities and dividing the sum of these
                                            moments by the sum of the wall rigidi-
                                            ties, in this case 1.00.

                                                     x ⫽ 0.22 ⫻ 16 ⫹ 0.45 ⫻ 40
                                                      ⫽ 21.52 ft

                                                 Thus, the 20-kip lateral force has an ec-
                                                 centricity of 21.52 ⫺ 20 ⫽ 1.52 ft. The
                                                 eccentric force may be resolved into a
FIGURE 5.85 Rigid diaphragm distributes 20-kip force acting through the center of
20-kip horizontal force to shear walls A, B, and rigidity and not producing torque, and a
C.                                               couple producing a torque of 20 ⫻
                                                 1.52 ⫽ 30.4 ft-kips.
    The nonrotational force is distributed to the shear walls in proportion to their
rigidities:

                            Wall A: 0.33 ⫻ 20 ⫽ 6.6 kips
                            Wall B: 0.22 ⫻ 20 ⫽ 4.4 kips
                            Wall C: 0.45 ⫻ 20 ⫽ 9.0 kips

For distribution of the torque to the shear walls, the equivalent of moment of inertia
must first be computed:

               I ⫽ 0.33(21.52)2 ⫹ 0.22(5.52)2 ⫹ 0.45(18.48)2 ⫽ 313

Then, the torque is distributed in direct proportion to shear-wall rigidity and dis-
tance from center of rigidity and in inverse proportion to I.

                  Wall A: 30.4 ⫻ 0.33 ⫻ 21.52 / 313 ⫽ 0.690 kips
                  Wall B: 30.4 ⫻ 0.22 ⫻ 5.52 / 313 ⫽ 0.118 kips
                  Wall C: 30.4 ⫻ 0.45 ⫻ 18.48 / 313 ⫽ 0.808 kips

   The torsional forces should be added to the nonrotational forces acting on walls
A and B, whereas the torsional force on wall C acts in the opposite direction to the
nonrotational force. For a conservative design, the torsional force on wall C should
not be subtracted. Hence, the walls should be designed for the following forces:
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                             5.105


                             Wall A: 6.6 ⫹ 0.7 ⫽ 7.3 kips
                             Wall B: 4.4 ⫹ 0.1 ⫽ 4.5 kips
                               Wall C: kips


5.12.3     Deflections of Bents or Shear Walls

When parallel bents or shear walls are connected by rigid diaphragms (Art. 5.12.1)
and horizontal loads are distributed to the vertical resisting elements in proportion
to their relative rigidities, the relative rigidity of the framing depends on the com-
bined horizontal deflections due to shear and flexure. For the dimensions of lateral-
force-resisting framing used in many high-rise buildings, however, deflections due
to flexure greatly exceed those due to shear. In such cases, only flexural rigidity
need be considered in determination of relative rigidity of the bents and shear walls
(Art. 5.12.5).
   Horizontal deflections can be determined by treating the bents and shear walls
as cantilevers. Deflections of braced bents can be calculated by the dummy-unit-
load method (Art. 5.10.4) or a matrix method (Art. 5.13.3). Deflections of rigid
frames can be obtained by summing the drifts of the stories, as determined by
moment distribution (Art. 5.11.9) or a matrix method. And deflections of shear
walls can be computed from formulas given in Art. 5.5.15, the dummy-unit-load
method, or a matrix method.
   For a shear wall with a solid, rectangular cross section, the flexural deflection
at the top under uniform loading is given by the formula for a cantilever in Fig.
5.39:
                                               wH 4
                                        ␦c ⫽                                  (5.142)
                                               8EI
where w    ⫽   uniform lateral load
      H    ⫽   height of the wall
      E    ⫽   modulus of elasticity of the wall material
       I   ⫽   moment of inertia of wall cross section ⫽ tL3 / 12
       t   ⫽   wall thickness
      L    ⫽   length of wall
   The cantilever shear deflection under uniform loading may be computed from
                                            0.6wH 2
                                     ␦v ⫽                                     (5.143)
                                              Ev A
where Ev ⫽ modulus of rigidity of wall cross section
         ⫽ E / 2(1 ⫹ ␮)
      ␮ ⫽ Poisson’s ratio for the wall material (0.25 for concrete and masonry)
       A ⫽ cross-sectional area of the wall ⫽ tL
The total deflection then is

                            ␦c ⫹ ␦v ⫽
                                        1.5wH
                                          Et    冋冉 冊 册H
                                                      L
                                                          3

                                                              ⫹
                                                                  H
                                                                  L
                                                                              (5.144)

   For a cantilever wall subjected to a concentrated load P at the top, the flexural
deflection at the top is
5.106                                 SECTION FIVE


                                                  PH 3
                                           ␦c ⫽                               (5.145)
                                                  3EI
The shear deflection at the top of the wall is
                                                 1.2PH
                                         ␦v ⫽                                 (5.146)
                                                  Ev A
Hence, the total deflection of the cantilever is

                               ␦⫽
                                    4P
                                    Et   冋冉 冊H
                                             L
                                                    3

                                                        ⫹ 0.75       册
                                                                     H
                                                                     L
                                                                              (5.147)

   For a wall fixed against rotation a the top and subjected to a concentrated load
P at the top, the flexural deflection at the top is
                                                  PH 3
                                         ␦c ⫽                                 (5.148)
                                                  12EI
The shear deflection for the fixed-end wall is given by Eq. (5.145). Hence, the total
deflection for the wall is

                                 ␦⫽
                                      P
                                      Et   冋冉 冊 H
                                                L
                                                        3

                                                            ⫹3   册
                                                                 H
                                                                 L
                                                                              (5.149)



5.12.4     Diaphragm-Deflection Limitations

As indicated in Art. 5.12.1, horizontal deflection of diaphragms plays an important
role in determining lateral-load distribution to bents and shear walls. Another design
consideration is the necessity of limiting diaphragm deflection to prevent excessive
stresses in walls perpendicular to shear walls. Equation (5.150) was suggested by
the Structural Engineers Association of Southern California for allowable story
deflection ⌬, in, of masonry or concrete building walls.
                                                  h2ƒ
                                         ⌬⫽                                   (5.150)
                                                0.01Et
where h    ⫽   height of wall between adjacent horizontal supports, ft
       t   ⫽   thickness of wall, in
      ƒ    ⫽   allowable flexural compressive stress of wall material, psi
      E    ⫽   modulus of elasticity of wall material, psi
    This limit on deflection must be applied with engineering judgment. For ex-
ample, continuity of wall at floor level is assumed, and in many cases is not present
because of through-wall flashing. In this situation, the deflection may be based on
the allowable compressive stress in the masonry, if a reduced cross section of wall
is assumed. The effect of reinforcement, which may be present in a reinforced brick
masonry wall or as a tie to the floor system in a nonreinforced or partly reinforced
masonry wall, was not considered in development of Eq. (5.150). Note also that
the limit on wall deflection is actually a limit on differential deflection between
two successive floor, or diaphragm, levels.
    Maximum span-width or span-depth ratios for diaphragms are usually used to
control horizontal diaphragm deflection indirectly. Normally, if the diaphragm is
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.107


designed with the proper ratio, the diaphragm deflection will not be critical. Table
5.8 may be used as a guide for proportioning diaphragms.


5.12.5   Shear-Wall Rigidity

Where shear walls are connected by rigid diaphragms so that they must deflect
equally under horizontal loads, the proportion of total horizontal load at any level
carried by a shear wall parallel to the load depends on the relative rigidity, or
stiffness, of the wall in the direction of the load (Art. 5.12.1). Rigidity of a shear
wall is inversely proportional to its deflection under unit horizontal load. This de-
flection equals the sum of the shear and flexural deflections under the load (Art.
5.12.3).
    Where a shear wall contains no openings, computations for deflection and ri-
gidity are simple. In Fig. 5.86a, each of the shear walls has the same length and
rigidity. So each takes half the total load. In Fig. 5.86b, length of wall C is half
that of wall D. By Eq. (5.142), C therefore receives less than one-eighth the total
load.

Walls with Openings. Where shear walls contain openings, such as doors and
windows, computations for deflection and rigidity are more complex. But approx-
imate methods may be used.
                                              For example, the wall in Fig. 5.87,
                                         subjected to a 1000-kip load at the top,
                                         may be treated in parts. The wall is 8 in
                                         thick, and its modulus of elasticity E ⫽
                                         2400 ksi. Its height-length ratio H / L is
                                         12
                                            ⁄20 ⫽ 0.6. The wall is perforated by
                                         two, symmetrically located, 4-ft-square
                                         openings.
                                              Deflection of this wall can be esti-
                                         mated by subtracting from the deflection
                                         it would have if it were solid the deflec-
                                         tion of a solid, 4-ft-deep, horizontal
FIGURE 5.87 Shear wall, 8 in thick, with midstrip, and then adding the deflection
openings.                                of the three coupled piers B, C, and D.
                                              Deflection of the 12-ft-high solid
wall can be obtained from Eq. (5.147):
                       4 ⫻ 103
               ␦⫽                 [(0.6)3 ⫹ 0.75 ⫻ 0.6] ⫽ 0.138 in
                    2.4 ⫻ 103 ⫻ 8
Rigidity of the solid wall then is
                                        1
                                 R⫽         ⫽ 7.22
                                      0.138
   Similarly, the deflection of the 4-ft-deep solid midstrip can be computed from
Eq. (5.147), with H / L ⫽ 4⁄20 ⫽ 0.20.
                      4 ⫻ 103
              ␦⫽                 [(0.20)3 ⫹ 0.75 ⫻ 0.20] ⫽ 0.033 in
                   2.4 ⫻ 103 ⫻ 8
   Deflection of the piers, which may be considered fixed top and bottom, can be
5.108                                     SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.8 Maximum Span-Width or Span-Depth Ratios for diaphragms—Roofs or
Floors*

                                                                                          Wood
                                                             Masonry and                 and light
                                                              concrete                     steel
           Diaphragm construction                               walls                      walls
Concrete                                                     Limited by deflection
Steel deck (continuous sheet in a single                       4:1                         5:1
  plane)
Steel deck (without continuous sheet)                            2:1                       21⁄2:1
Cast-in-place reinforced gypsum roofs                            3:1                       4:1
Plywood (nailed all edges)                                       3:1                       4:1
Plywood (nailed to supports only—blocking                        21⁄2:1                    31⁄2:1
  may be omitted between joists)
Diagonal sheating (special)                                      3:1†                      31⁄2:1
Diagonal sheating (conventional                                  2:1†                      21⁄2:1
  construction)
    * From California Administrative code, Title 21, Public Works.
    † Use of diagonal sheathed or unblocked plywood diaphragms for buildings having masonry or rein-
forced concrete walls shall be limited to one-story buildings or to the roof of a top story.




                   FIGURE 5.86 Distribution of horizontal load to parallel
                   shear walls: (a) walls with the same length and rigidity share
                   the load equally; (b) wall half the length of another carries
                   less than one-eighth of the load.




obtained from Eq. (5.149), with H / L ⫽ 4⁄4 ⫽ 1. For any one of the piers, the
deflection is

                                      103
                         ␦⬘v ⫽                 (1 ⫹ 3) ⫽ 0.208 in
                                 2.4 ⫻ 103 ⫻ 8

The rigidity of a single pier is 1 / 0.208 ⫽ 4.81, and of the three piers, 3 ⫻ 4.81 ⫽
14.43. Therefore, the deflection of the three piers when coupled is
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                                   5.109


                                         1
                                 ␦⫽          ⫽ 0.069 in
                                       14.43
The deflection of the whole wall, with openings, then is approximately
                       ␦ ⫽ 0.138 ⫺ 0.033 ⫹ 0.069 ⫽ 0.174 in
And its rigidity is
                                           1
                                   R⫽          ⫽ 5.74
                                         0.174



5.12.6   Effects of Shear-Wall Arrangements

To increase the stiffness of shear walls and thus their resistance to bending, inter-
secting walls or flanges may be used. Often in the design of buildings, A-, T-,
                                                  U-, L-, and I-shaped walls in plan de-
                                                  velop as natural parts of the design.
                                                  Shear walls with these shapes have bet-
                                                  ter flexural resistance than a single,
                                                  straight wall.
                                                      In calculation of flexural stresses in
                                                  masonry shear walls for symmetrical T
                                                  or I sections, the effective flange width
                                                  may not exceed one-sixth the total wall
                                                  height above the level being analyzed.
                                                  For unsymmetrical L or C sections, the
                                                  width considered effective may not ex-
                                                  ceed one-sixteenth the total wall height
FIGURE 5.88 Effective flange width of shear above the level being analyzed. In either
walls may be less than the actual width: (a) lim-
its for flanges of I and T shapes; (b) limits for case, the overhang for any section may
C and L shapes.                                   not exceed six times the flange thickness
                                                  (Fig. 5.88).
     The shear stress at the intersection of the walls should not exceed the permissible
shear stress.


5.12.7   Coupled Shear Walls

Another method than that described in Art. 5.12.6 for increasing the stiffness of a
bearing-wall structure and reducing the possibility of tension developing in masonry
shear walls under lateral loads is coupling of coplanar shear walls.
   Figure 5.89 and 5.90 indicate the effect of coupling on stress distribution in a
pair of walls under horizontal forces parallel to the walls. A flexible connection
between the walls is assumed in Figs. 5.89a and 5.90a, so that the walls act as
independent vertical cantilevers in resisting lateral loads. In Figs. 5.89b and 5.90b,
the walls are assumed to be connected with a more rigid member, which is capable
of shear and moment transfer. A rigid-frame type action results. This can be ac-
complished with a steel-reinforced concrete, or reinforced brick masonry coupling.
5.110                                   SECTION FIVE




           FIGURE 5.89 Stress distribution in end shear walls: (a) with flexible
           coupling; (b) with rigid-frame-type action; (c) with plate-type action.




            FIGURE 5.90 Stress distribution in interior shear walls: (a) with flex-
            ible coupling; (b) with rigid-frame-type action; (c) with plate-type ac-
            tion.



A plate-type action is indicated in Figs. 5.89c and 5.90c. This assumes an extremely
rigid connection between walls, such as fully story-height walls or deep rigid span-
drels.


5.13    FINITE-ELEMENT METHODS

From the basic principles given in preceding articles, systematic procedures have
been developed for determining the behavior of a structure from a knowledge of
the behavior under load of its components. In these methods, called finite-element
methods, a structural system is considered an assembly of a finite number of finite-
size components, or elements. These are assumed to be connected to each other
only at discrete points, called nodes. From the characteristics of the elements, such
as their stiffness or flexibility, the characteristics of the whole system can be de-
rived. With these known, internal stresses and strains throughout can be computed.
   Choice of elements to be used depends on the type of structure. For example,
for a truss with joints considered hinged, a natural choice of element would be a
bar, subjected only to axial forces. For a rigid frame, the elements might be beams
subjected to bending and axial forces, or to bending, axial forces, and torsion. For
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.111


a thin plate or shell, elements might be triangles or rectangles, connected at vertices.
For three-dimensional structures, elements might be beams, bars, tetrahedrons,
cubes, or rings.
    For many structures, because of the number of finite elements and nodes, anal-
ysis by a finite-element method requires mathematical treatment of large amounts
of data and solution of numerous simultaneous equations. For this purpose, the use
of computers is advisable. The mathematics of such analyses is usually simpler and
more compact when the data are handled in matrix for. (See also Art. 5.10.7.)


5.13.1   Force and Displacement Methods

The methods used for analyzing structures generally may be classified as force
(flexibility) or displacement (stiffness) methods.
    In analysis of statically indeterminate structures by force methods, forces are
chosen as redundants, or unknowns. The choice is made in such a way that equi-
librium is satisfied. These forces are then determined from the solution of equations
that ensure compatibility of all displacements of elements at each node. After the
redundants have been computed, stresses and strains throughout the structure can
be found from equilibrium equations and stress-strain relations.
    In displacement methods, displacements are chosen as unknowns. The choice is
made in such a way that geometric compatibility is satisfied. These displacements
are then determined from the solution of equations that ensure that forces acting at
each node are in equilibrium. After the unknowns have been computed, stresses
and stains throughout the structure can be found from equilibrium equations and
stress-strain relations.
    In choosing a method, the following should be kept in mind: In force methods,
the number of unknowns equals the degree of indeterminacy. In displacement meth-
ods, the number of unknowns equals the degrees of freedom of displacement at
nodes. The fewer the unknowns, the fewer the calculations required.
    Both methods are based on the force-displacement relations and utilize the stiff-
ness and flexibility matrices described in Art. 5.10.7. In these methods, displace-
ments and external forces are resolved into components—usually horizontal, ver-
tical, and rotational—at nodes, or points of connection of the finite elements. In
accordance with Eq. (5.103a), the stiffness matrix transforms displacements into
forces. Similarly, in accordance with Eq. (5.103b), the flexibility matrix transforms
forces into displacements. To accomplish the transformation, the nodal forces and
displacements must be assembled into correspondingly positioned elements of force
and displacement vectors. Depending on whether the displacement or the force
method is chosen, stiffness or flexibility matrices are then established for each of
the finite elements and these matrices are assembled to form a square matrix, from
which the stiffness or flexibility matrix for the structure as a whole is derived. With
that matrix known and substituted into equilibrium and compatibility equations for
the structure, all nodal forces and displacements of the finite elements can be de-
termined from the solution of the equations. Internal stresses and strains in the
elements can be computed from the now known nodal forces and displacements.


5.13.2   Element Flexibility and Stiffness Matrices

The relationship between independent forces and displacements at nodes of finite
elements comprising a structure is determined by flexibility matrices f or stiffness
5.112                               SECTION FIVE


matrices k of the elements. In some cases, the components of these matrices can
be developed from the defining equations:
   The jth column of a flexibility matrix of a finite element contains all the nodal
displacements of the element when one force Sj is set equal to unity and all other
independent forces are set equal to zero.
   The jth column of a stiffness matrix of a finite element consists of the forces
acting at the nodes of the element to produce a unit displacement of the node at
which displacement ␦j occurs and in the direction of ␦j but no other nodal displace-
ments of the element.

Bars with Axial Stress Only. As an example of the use of the definitions of
flexibility and stiffness, consider the simple case of an elastic bar under tension
                                            applied by axial forces Pi and Pj at
                                            nodes i and j, respectively (Fig. 5.91).
                                            The bar might be the finite element of a
                                            truss, such as a diagonal or a hanger.
FIGURE 5.91 Elastic bar in tension.         Connections to other members are made
                                            at nodes i and j, which an transmit only
forces in the directions i to j or j to i.
    For equilibrium, Pi ⫽ Pj ⫽ P. Displacement of node j relative to node i is e.
From Eq. (5.23), e ⫽ PL / AE, where L is the initial length of the bar, A the bar
cross-sectional area, and E the modulus of elasticity. Setting P eq 1 yields the
flexibility of the bar,
                                            L
                                      ƒ⫽                                    (5.151)
                                           AE
Setting e ⫽ 1 gives the stiffness of the bar,
                                           AE
                                      k⫽                                    (5.152)
                                            L

Beams with Bending Only. As another example of the use of the definition to
determine element flexibility and stiffness matrices, consider the simple case of an
elastic prismatic beam in bending applied by moments Mi and Mj at nodes i and j,
respectively (Fig. 5.92a). The beam might be a finite element of a rigid frame.
Connections to other members are made at nodes i and j, which can transmit mo-
ments and forces normal to the beam.
   Nodal displacements of the element can be sufficiently described by rotations ␪i
and ␪j relative to the straight line between nodes i and j. For equilibrium, forces
Vj ⫽ ⫺Vi normal to the beam are required at nodes j and i, respectively, and Vj ⫽
(Mi ⫹ Mj) / L, where L is the span of the beam. Thus, Mi and Mj are the only




                FIGURE 5.92 Beam subjected to end moments and shears.
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.113


independent forces acting. Hence, the force-displacement relationship can be written
for this element as

                                ␪⫽   冋册 冋 册
                                     ␪i
                                     ␪j
                                        ⫽f
                                           Mi
                                           Mj
                                                         ⫽ fM                 (5.153)


                               M⫽    冋 册 冋册
                                     Mi
                                     Mj
                                              ⫽k
                                                    ␪i
                                                    ␪j
                                                         ⫽ k␪                 (5.154)

   The flexibility matrix f then will be a 2 ⫻ 2 matrix. The first column can be
obtained by setting Mi ⫽ 1 and Mj ⫽ 0 (Fig. 5.92b). The resulting angular rotations
are given by Eqs. (5.107) and (5.108): For a beam with constant moment of inertia
I and modulus of elasticity E, the rotations are ␣ ⫽ L / 3EI and ␤ ⫽ ⫺L / 6EI.
Similarly, the second column can be developed by setting Mi ⫽ 0 and Mj ⫽ 1.
   The flexibility matrix for a beam in bending then is



                           冤                  冥
                           L    L

                                                         冋       册
                              ⫺
                          3EI  6EI    L   2 ⫺1
                      f⫽           ⫽                                          (5.155)
                           L    L    6EI ⫺1  2
                         ⫺
                          6EI  3EI
The stiffness matrix, obtained in a similar manner or by inversion of f, is



                                冤 冥
                              4EI 2EI
                               L
                          k ⫽ 2EI  L   2EI 2 1
                                  4EI ⫽ L 1 2            冋 册                  (5.156)
                               L   L

Beams Subjected to Bending and Axial Forces. For a beam subjected to nodal
moments Mi and Mj and axial forces P, flexibility and stiffness are represented by
3 ⫻ 3 matrices. The load-displacement relations for a beam of span L, constant
moment of inertia I, modulus of elasticity E, and cross-sectional area A are given
by


                          冤冥 冤 冥 冤 冥 冤冥
                           ␪          Mi           Mi     ␪i
                           ␪j   ⫽f    Mj           Mj ⫽ k ␪j                  (5.157)
                           e          P            P      e

In this case, the flexibility matrix is


                                          冤                  冥
                                      L   2        ⫺1  0
                                f⫽       ⫺1          2 0                      (5.158)
                                     6EI  0          0 ␩

where ␩ ⫽ 6I / A, and the stiffness matrix is


                                 k⫽
                                           冤
                                          EI 4 2 0
                                             2 4 0
                                          L 0 0 ␺        冥                    (5.159)


where ␺ ⫽ A / I.
5.114                                SECTION FIVE


5.13.3   Displacement (Stiffness) Method

With the stiffness or flexibility matrix of each finite element of a structure known,
the stiffness or flexibility matrix for the whole structure can be determined, and
with that matrix, forces and displacements throughout the structure can be computed
(Art. 5.13.2). To illustrate the procedure, the steps in the displacement, or stiffness,
method are described in the following. The steps in the flexibility method are sim-
ilar. For the stiffness method:
Step 1. Divide the structure into interconnected elements and assign a number,
for identification purposes, to every node (intersection and terminal of elements).
It may also be useful to assign an identifying number to each element.
Step 2. Assume a right-handed cartesian coordinate system, with axes x, y, z.
Assume also at each node of a structure to be analyzed a system of base unit
vectors, e1 in the direction of the x axis, e2 in the direction of the y axis, and e3 in
the direction of the z axis. Forces and moments acting at a node are resolved into
components in the directions of the base vectors. Then, the forces and moments at
the node may be represented by the vector Piei, where Pi is the magnitude of the
force or moment acting in the direction of ei. This vector, in turn, may be conven-
iently represented by a column matrix P. Similarly, the displacements—translations
and rotation—of the node may be represented by the vector ⌬iei, where ⌬i is the
magnitude of the displacement acting in the direction of ei. This vector, in turn,
may be represented by a column matrix ⌬.
   For compactness, and because, in structural analysis, similar operations are per-
formed on all nodal forces, all the loads, including moments, acting on all the
nodes may be combined into a single column matrix P. Similarly, all the nodal
displacements may be represented by a single column matrix ⌬.
   When loads act along a beam, they should be replaced by equivalent forces at
the nodes—simple-beam reactions and fixed-end moments, both with signs reversed
from those induced by the loads. The final element forces are then determined by
adding these moments and reactions to those obtained from the solution with only
the nodal forces.
Step 3. Develop a stiffness matrix ki for each element i of the structure (see Art.
5.13.2). By definition of stiffness matrix, nodal displacements and forces for the i
the element are related by

                             Si ⫽ ki␦i i ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , n                      (5.160)

where Si ⫽ matrix of forces, including moments and torques acting at the nodes
           of the ith element
      ␦i ⫽ matrix of displacements of the nodes of the i th element

Step 4. For compactness, combine this relationship between nodal displacements
and forces for each element into a single matrix equation applicable to all the
elements:

                                       S ⫽ k␦                                   (5.161)

where S ⫽ matrix of all forces acting at the nodes of all elements
      ␦ ⫽ matrix of all nodal displacements for all elements
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.115




                                  冤                      冥
                                k1       0    .   .   . 0
                                0        k2   .   .   . 0
                             k⫽                                               (5.162)
                                ..       ..   .   .   . ..
                                0        0    .   .   . kn
Step 5. Develop a matrix b0 that will transform the displacements ⌬ of the nodes
of the structure into the displacement vector ␦ while maintaining geometric com-
patibility:
                                       ␦ ⫽ b0⌬                                (5.163)
b0 is a matrix of influence coefficients. The jth column of b0 contains the element
nodal displacements when the node where ⌬j occurs is given a unit displacement
in the direction of ⌬j, and no other nodes are displaced.
Step 6. Compute the stiffness matrix K for the whole structure from
                                      K ⫽ bT0 kb0                             (5.164)
where bT0 ⫽ transpose of b0 ⫽ matrix b0 with rows and columns interchanged
   This equation may be derived as follows: From energy relationship, P ⫽ bT0 S.
Substitution of k␦ for S [Eq. (5.161)] and then substitution of b0⌬ for ␦ [Eq.
(5.163)] yields P ⫽ bT0 kb0⌬. Comparison of this with Eq. (5.103a), P ⫽ k⌬ leads
to Eq. (5.164).
Step 7. With the stiffness matrix K now known, solve the simultaneous equations
                                      ⌬ ⫽ K⫺1P                                (5.165)
for the nodal displacements ⌬. With these determined, calculate the member forces
from
                                      S ⫽ kb0⌬                                (5.166)
   (N. M. Baran, ‘‘Finite Element Analysis on Microcomputers,’’ and H. Kardes-
luncer and D. H. Norris, ‘‘Finite Element Handbook,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing
Company, New York; K. Bathe, ‘‘Finite Element Procedures in Engineering Anal-
ysis,’’ T. R. Hughes, ‘‘The Finite Element Method,’’ W. Weaver, Jr., and P. R.
Johnston, ‘‘Structural Dynamics by Finite Elements,’’ and H. T. Y. Yang, ‘‘Finite
Element Structural Analysis,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.)



5.14   STRESSES IN ARCHES

An arch is a curved beam, the radius of curvature of which is very large relative
to the depth of the section. It differs from a straight beam in that: (1) loads induce
both bending and direct compressive stresses in an arch; (2) arch reactions have
horizontal components even though loads are all vertical; and (3) deflections have
horizontal as well as vertical components (see also Arts. 5.6.1 to 5.6.4). Names of
arch parts are given in Fig. 5.93.
5.116                               SECTION FIVE




                   FIGURE 5.93 Components of an arch.




   The necessity of resisting the horizontal components of the reactions is an im-
portant consideration in arch design. Sometimes these forces are taken by the tie
rods between the supports, sometimes by heavy abutments or buttresses.
   Arches may be built with fixed ends, as can straight beams, or with hinges at
the supports. They may also be built with a hinge at the crown.



5.14.1   Three-Hinged Arches

An arch with a hinge at the crown as well as at both supports (Fig. 5.94) is statically
determinate. There are four unknowns—two horizontal and two vertical compo-
nents of the reactions—but four equations based on the laws of equilibrium are
available: (1) The sum of the horizontal forces must be zero. (2) The sum of the
moments about the left support must be zero. (3) The sum of the moments about
the right support must be zero. (4) The bending moment at the crown hinge must
be zero (not to be confused with the sum of the moments about the crown, which
also must be equal to zero but which would not lead to an independent equation
for the solution of the reactions).
                                                Stresses and reactions in three-
                                             hinged arches can be determined graph-
                                             ically by taking advantage of the fact
                                             that the bending moment at the crown
                                             hinge is zero. For example, in Fig.
                                             5.94a, a concentrated load P is applied
                                             to segment AB of the arch. Then, since
                                             the bending moment at B must be zero,
                                             the line of action of the reaction at C
                                             must pass through the crown hinge. It
                                             intersects the line of action of P at X.
                                             The line of action of the reaction at A
                                             must also pass through X. Since P is
                                             equal to the sum of the reactions, and
FIGURE 5.94 Three-hinged arch.               since the directions of the reactions have
                                             thus been determined, the magnitude of
the reactions can be measured from a parallelogram of forces (Fig. 5.94b). When
the reactions have been found, the stresses can be computed from the laws of statics
(see Art. 5.14.3) or, in the case of a trussed arch, determined graphically.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.117


5.14.2   Two-Hinged Arches

When an arch has hinges at the supports only (Fig. 5.95), it is statically indeter-
minate, and some knowledge of its deformations is required to determine the re-
actions. One procedure is to assume that one of the supports is on rollers. This
makes the arch statically determinate. The reactions and the horizontal movement
of the support are computed for this condition (Fig. 5.95b). Then, the magnitude
of the horizontal force required to return the movable support to its original position
is calculated (Fig. 5.95c). The reactions for the two-hinged arch are finally found
by superimposing the first set of reactions on the second (Fig. 5.95d ).
    For example, if ␦x is the horizontal movement of the support due to the loads,
and if ␦x ⬘ is the horizontal movement of the support due to a unit horizontal force
applied to the support, then
                                ␦x ⫹ H␦x ⬘ ⫽ 0                                 (5.167)
                                                       ␦x
                                           H⫽⫺                                 (5.168)
                                                       ␦x ⬘
where H is the unknown horizontal reaction. (When a tie rod is used to take the
thrust, the right-hand side of Eq. (5.167) is not zero, but the elongation of the rod,
HL / AE.) The dummy unit-load method [Eq. (5.96)] can be used to compute ␦x and
␦x ⬘:

                             ␦x ⫽   冕
                                    A
                                     B
                                         My
                                         EI
                                            ds ⫺   冕
                                                   B

                                                   A
                                                         N dx
                                                          AE
                                                                               (5.169)




         FIGURE 5.95 Two-hinged arch.
5.118                                   SECTION FIVE


where M     ⫽   moment at any section resulting from loads
       N    ⫽   normal thrust on cross section
       A    ⫽   cross-sectional area of arch
       y    ⫽   ordinate of section measured from A as origin, when B is on rollers
        I   ⫽   moment of inertia of section
       E    ⫽   modulus of elasticity
      ds    ⫽   differential length along axis of arch
      dx    ⫽   differential length along horizontal

                            ␦x ⬘ ⫽ ⫺   冕
                                       A
                                        B
                                            y2
                                            EI
                                               ds ⫺   冕
                                                      B

                                                      A
                                                          cos2 ␣ dx
                                                             AE
                                                                              (5.170)

where ␣ ⫽ the angle the tangent to the axis at the section makes with the horizontal.
Unless the thrust is very large and would be responsible for large strains in the
direction of the arch axis, the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (5.169)
can usually be ignored.
   In most cases, integration is impracticable. The integrals generally must be eval-
uated by approximate methods. The arch axis is divided into a convenient number
of sections and the functions under the integral sign evaluated for each section. The
sum is approximately equal to the integral. Thus, for the usual two-hinged arch,

                                    冘 (My ⌬s / EI)
                                            B


                                            A
                       H⫽                                                     (5.171)
                          冘 (y ⌬s / EI) ⫹ 冘 (cos ␣ ⌬x / AE )
                              B                   B
                                   2                       2
                              A                   A


(S. Timoshenko and D. H. Young, ‘‘Theory of Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York; S. F. Borg and J. J. Gennaro, ‘‘Modern Structural Analysis,’’
Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, Inc., New York.)


5.14.3   Stresses in Arch Ribs

When the reactions have been found for an arch (Arts. 5.14.1 to 5.14.2), the prin-
cipal forces acting on any cross section can be found by applying the equations of
equilibrium. For example, consider the portion of an arch in Fig. 5.96, where the




                   FIGURE 5.96 Interior stresses at X hold portion LX of an
                   arch rib in equilibrium.
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.119


forces acting at an interior section X are to be found. The load P, HL (or HR), and
VL (or VR) may be resolved into components parallel to the axial thrust N and the
shear S at X, as indicated in Fig. 5.96. Then, by equating the sum of the forces in
each direction to zero, we get
                    N ⫽ VL sin ␪x ⫹ HL cos ␪x ⫹ P sin (␪x ⫺ ␪)                   (5.172)

                    S ⫽ VL cos ␪x ⫺ HL sin ␪x ⫹ P cos (␪x ⫺ ␪)                   (5.173)
And the bending moment at X is
                      M ⫽ VLx ⫺ H1 y ⫺ Pa cos ␪ ⫺ Pb sin ␪                       (5.174)
   The shearing unit stress on the arch cross section at X can be determined from
S wit the aid of Eq. (5.59). The normal unit stresses can be calculated from N and
M with the aid of Eq. (5.67).
   In designing an arch, it may be necessary to compute certain secondary stresses,
in addition to those caused by live, dead, wind, and snow loads. Among the sec-
ondary stresses to be considered are those due to temperature changes, rib short-
ening due to thrust or shrinkage, deformation of tie rods, and unequal settlement
of footings. The procedure is the same as for loads on the arch, with the defor-
mations producing the secondary stresses substituted for or treated the same as the
deformations due to loads.



5.15     THIN-SHELL STRUCTURES

A structural membrane or shell is a curved surface structure. Usually, it is capable
of transmitting loads in more than two directions to supports. It is highly efficient
structurally when it is so shaped, proportioned, and supported that it transmits the
loads without bending or twisting.
    A membrane or a shell is defined by its middle surface, halfway between its
extrados, or outer surface and intrados, or inner surface. Thus, depending on the
geometry of the middle surface, it might be a type of dome, barrel arch, cone, or
hyperbolic paraboloid. Its thickness is the distance, normal to the middle surface,
between extrados and intrados.


5.15.1   Thin-Shell Analysis

A thin shell is a shell with a thickness relatively small compared with its other
dimensions. But it should not be so thin that deformations would be large compared
with the thickness.
    The shell should also satisfy the following conditions: Shearing stresses normal
to the middle surface are negligible. Points on a normal to the middle surface before
it is deformed lie on a straight line after deformation. And this line is normal to
the deformed middle surface.
    Calculation of the stresses in a thin shell generally is carried out in two major
steps, both usually involving the solution of differential equations. In the first, bend-
ing and torsion are neglected (membrane theory, Art. 5.15.2). In the second step,
corrections are made to the previous solution by superimposing the bending and
5.120                                 SECTION FIVE


shear stresses that are necessary to satisfy boundary conditions (bending theory,
Art. 5.15.3).

Ribbed Shells. For long-span construction, thin shells often are stiffened at inter-
vals by ribs. Usually, the construction is such that the shells transmit some of the
load imposed on them to the ribs, which then perform structurally as more than
just stiffeners. Stress and strain distributions in shells and ribs consequently are
complicated by the interaction between shells and ribs. The shells restrain the ribs,
and the ribs restrain the shells. Hence, ribbed shells usually are analyzed by ap-
proximate methods based on reasonable assumptions.
    For example, for a cylindrical shell with circumferential ribs, the ribs act like
arches. For an approximate analysis, the ribbed shell therefore may be assumed to
be composed of a set of arched ribs with the thin shell between the ribs acting in
the circumferential direction as flanges of the arches. In the longitudinal direction,
it may be assumed that the shell transfers load to the ribs in flexure. Designers may
adjust the results of a computation based on such assumptions to correct for a
variety of conditions, such as the effects of free edges of the shell, long distances
between ribs, relative flexibility of ribs and shell, and characteristics of the structural
materials.


5.15.2   Membrane Theory for Thin Shells

Thin shells usually are designed so that normal shears, bending moments, and
torsion are very small, except in relatively small portions of the shells. In the
membrane theory, these stresses are ignored.
    Despite the neglected stresses, the remaining stresses ae in equilibrium, except
possibly at boundaries, supports, and discontinuities. At any interior point, the num-
ber of equilibrium conditions equals the number of unknowns. Thus, in the
membrane theory, a thin shell is statically determinate.
    The membrane theory does not hold for concentrated loads normal to the middle
surface, except possibly at a peak or valley. The theory does not apply where
boundary conditions are incompatible with equilibrium. And it is in exact where
there is geometric incompatibility at the boundaries. The last is a common condi-
tion, but the error is very small if the shell is not very flat. Usually, disturbances
of membrane equilibrium due to incompatibility with deformations at boundaries,
supports, or discontinuities are appreciable only in a narrow region about each
source of disturbance. Much larger disturbances result from incompatibility with
equilibrium conditions.
    To secure the high structural efficiency of a thin shell, select a shape, proportions,
and supports for the specific design conditions that come as close as possible to
satisfying the membrane theory. Keep the thickness constant; if it must change, use
a gradual taper. Avoid concentrated and abruptly changing loads. Change curvature
gradually. Keep discontinuities to a minimum. Provide reactions that are tangent to
the middle surface. At boundaries, ensure, to the extent possible, compatibility of
shell deformations with deformations of adjoining members, or at least keep re-
straints to a minimum. Make certain that reactions along boundaries are equal in
magnitude and direction to the shell forces there.
    Means usually adopted to satisfy these requirements at boundaries and supports
are illustrated in Fig. 5.97. In Fig. 5.97a, the slope of the support and provision for
movement normal to the middle surface ensure a reaction tangent to the middle
surface. In Fig. 5.97b, a stiff rib, or ring girder, resists unbalanced shears and
                                    STRUCTURAL THEORY                                         5.121




    FIGURE 5.97 Special provisions made at supports and boundaries of thin shells to
    meet requirements of the membrane theory include: (a) a device to ensure a reaction
    tangent to the middle surface; (b) stiffened edges, such as the ring girder at the base of
    a dome; (c) gradually increased shell thicknesses at a stiffening member; (d ) a transition
    curve at changes in section; (e) a stiffening edge obtained by thickening the shell; ( ƒ )
    scalloped edges; (g) a flared support.



transmits normal forces to columns below. The enlarged view of the ring girder in
Fig. 5.97c shows gradual thickening of the shell to reduce the abruptness of the
change in section. The stiffening ring at the lantern in Fig. 5.97d, extending around
the opening at the crown, projects above the middle surface, for compatibility of
strains, and connects through a transition curve with the shell; often, the rim need
merely be thickened when the edge is upturned, and the ring can be omitted. In
Fig. 5.97e, the boundary of the shell is a stiffened edge. In Fig. 5.97f, a scalloped
shell provides gradual tapering for transmitting the loads to the supports, at the
same time providing access to the shell enclosure. And in Fig. 5.97g, a column is
flared widely at the top to support a thin shell at an interior point.
    Even when the conditions for geometric compatibility are not satisfactory, the
membrane theory is a useful approximation. Furthermore, it yields a particular
solution to the differential equations of the bending theory.
    (D. P. Billington, ‘‘Thin Shell Concrete Structures,’’ 2d ed., and S. Timoshenko
and S. Woinowsky-Krieger, ‘‘Theory of Plates and Shells,’’ McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York: V. S. Kelkar and R. T. Sewell, ‘‘Fundamentals of the Analysis
and Design of Shell Structures,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.)


5.15.3   Bending Theory for Thin Shells

When equilibrium conditions are not satisfied or incompatible deformations exist
at boundaries, bending and torsion stresses arise in the shell. Sometimes, the design
of the shell and its supports can be modified to reduce or eliminate these stresses
(Art. 5.15.2). When the design cannot eliminate them, provisions must be made for
the shell to resist them.
5.122                               SECTION FIVE


    But even for the simplest types of shells and loading, the stresses are difficult
to compute. In bending theory, a thin shell is statically indeterminate; deformation
conditions must supplement equilibrium conditions in setting up differential equa-
tions for determining the unknown forces and moments. Solution of the resulting
equations may be tedious and time-consuming, if indeed solution if possible.
    In practice, therefore, shell design relies heavily on the designer’s experience
and judgment. The designer should consider the type of shell, material of which it
is made, and support and boundary conditions, and then decide whether to apply a
bending theory in full, use an approximate bending theory, or make a rough estimate
of the effects of bending and torsion. (Note that where the effects of a disturbance
are large, these change the normal forces and shears computed by the membrane
theory.) For concrete domes, for example, the usual procedure is to use as support
a deep, thick girder or a heavily reinforced or prestressed tension ring, and the shell
is gradually thickened in the vicinity of this support (Fig. 5.97c).
    Circular barrel arches, with ratio of radius to distance between supporting arch
ribs less than 0.25 may be designed as beams with curved cross section. Secondary
stresses, however, must be taken into account. These include stresses due to volume
change of rib and shell, rib shortening, unequal settlement of footings, and tem-
perature differentials between surfaces.
    Bending theory for cylinders and domes is given in W. Flügge, ‘‘Stresses in
Shells,’’ Springer-Verlag, New York; D. P. Billington, ‘‘Thin Shell Concrete Struc-
tures,’’ 2d ed., and S. Timoshenko and S. Woinowsky-Krieger, ‘‘Theory of Plates
and Shells,’’ McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York; ‘‘Design of Cylindrical Con-
crete Shell Roofs,’’ Manual of Practice No. 31, American Society of Civil Engi-
neers.


5.15.4   Stresses in Thin Shells

The results of the membrane and bending theories are expressed in terms of unit
forces and unit moments, acting per unit of length over the thickness of the shell.
To compute the unit stresses from these forces and moments, usual practice is to
assume normal forces and shears to be uniformly distributed over the shell thickness
and bending stresses to be linearly distributed.
   Then, normal stresses can be computed from equations of the form
                                         Nx   M
                                 ƒx ⫽       ⫹ 3 x z                            (5.175)
                                          t  t / 12
where z ⫽ distance from middle surface
      t ⫽ shell thickness
    Mx ⫽ unit bending moment about axis parallel to direction of unit normal
          force Nx
Similarly, shearing stresses produced by central shears and twisting moments may
be calculated from equations of the form
                                         T     D
                                 vxy ⫽      3     z                           (5.176)
                                         t  t / 12
where D ⫽ twisting moment and T ⫽ unit shear force along the middle surface.
Normal shearing stresses may be computed on the assumption of a parabolic stress
distribution over the shell thickness:
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.123



                                 vxz ⫽   3   冉
                                          V t2
                                         t /t 4
                                                ⫺ z2   冊                        (5.177)

where V ⫽ unit shear force normal to middle surface.


5.15.5   Folded Plates

A folded-plate structure consists of a series of thin planar elements, or flat plates,
connected to one another along their edges. Usually used on long spans, especially
for roofs, folded plates derive their economy from the girder action of the plates
and the mutual support they give one another.
   Longitudinally, the plates may be continuous over their supports. Transversely,
there may be several plates in each bay (Fig. 5.98). At the edges, or folds, they
may be capable of transmitting both moment and shear or only shear.
   A folded-plate structure has a two-way action in transmitting loads to its sup-
ports. Transversely, the elements act as slabs spanning between plates on either
side. The plates then act as girders in carrying the load from the slabs longitudinally
to supports, which must be capable of resisting both horizontal and vertical forces.
   If the plates are hinged along their edges, the design of the structure is relatively
simple. Some simplification also is possible if the plates, though having integral
edges, are steeply sloped or if the span is sufficiently long with respect to other
dimensions that beam theory applies. But there are no criteria for determining when
such simplification is possible with acceptable accuracy. In general, a reasonably
accurate analysis of folded-plate stresses is advisable.
   Several good methods are available (D. Yitzhaki, ‘‘The Design of Prismatic and
Cylindrical Shell Roofs,’’ North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam; ‘‘Phase
I Report on Folded-plate Construction,’’ Proceedings Paper 3741, Journal of the
Structural Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, December 1963; and A.
L. Parme and J. A. Sbarounis, ‘‘Direct Solution of Folded Plate Concrete Roofs,’’
EB021D, Portland Cement Association, Skokie, Ill.). They all take into account the
effects of plate deflections on the slabs and usually make the following assumptions:
   The material is elastic, isotropic, and homogeneous. The longitudinal distribution
of all loads on all plates is the same. The plates carry loads transversely only by




               FIGURE 5.98 Folded-plate structure.
5.124                                SECTION FIVE


bending normal to their planes and longitudinally only by bending within their
planes. Longitudinal stresses vary linearly over the depth of each plate. Supporting
members, such as diaphragms, frames, and beams, are infinitely stiff in their own
planes and completely flexible normal to their own planes. Plates have no torsional
stiffness normal to their own planes. Displacements due to forces other than bending
moments are negligible.
    Regardless of the method selected, the computations are rather involved; so it
is wise to carry out the work by computer or, when done manually, in a well-
organized table. The Yitzhaki method offers some advantages over others in that
the calculations can be tabulated, it is relatively simple, it requires the solution of
no more simultaneous equations than one for each edge for simply supported plates,
it is flexible, and it can easily be generalized to cover a variety of conditions.

Yitzhaki Method. Based on the assumptions and general procedure given above,
the Yitzhaki method deals with the slab and plate systems that comprise a folded-
plate structure in two ways. In the first, a unit width of slab is considered continuous
over supports immovable in the direction of the load (Fig. 5.99b). The strip usually
is taken where the longitudinal plate stresses are a maximum. Second, the slab
reactions are taken as loads on the plates, which now are assumed to be hinged
along the edged (Fig. 5.99c). Thus, the slab reactions cause angle changes in the
plates at each fold. Continuity is restored by applying to the plates an unknown
moment at each edge. The moments can be determined from the fact that at each
edge the sum of the angle changes due to the loads and to the unknown moments
must equal zero.
    The angle changes due to the unknown moments have two components. One is
the angle change at each slab end, now hinged to an adjoining slab, in the transverse
strip of unit width. The second is the angle change due to deflection of the plates.
The method assumes that the angle change at each fold varies in the same way
longitudinally as the angle changes along the other folds.
    For example, for the folded-plate structure in Fig. 5.99a, the steps in analysis
are as follows:
Step 1. Compute the loads on a 12-in-wide transverse strip at midspan.
Step 2. Consider the strip as a continuous slab supported at the folds (Fig. 5.99b),
and compute the bending moments by moment distribution.
Step 3. From the end moments M found in Step 2, compute slab reactions and
plate loads. Reactions (positive upward) at the nth edge are

                                        Mn⫺1 ⫹ Mn Mn ⫹ Mn⫹1
                     Rn ⫽ Vn ⫹ Vn⫹1 ⫹            ⫺                              (5.178)
                                            an       an⫹1

where Vn, Vn⫹1   ⫽   shears at both sides of edge n
           Mn    ⫽   moment at edge n
         Mn⫺1    ⫽   moment at edge (n ⫺ 1)
         Mn⫹1    ⫽   moment at edge (n ⫹ 1)
             a   ⫽   horizontal projection of depth h

   Let k ⫽ tan ␾n ⫺ tan ␾n⫹1, where ␾ is positive as shown in Fig. 99a. Then, the
load (positive downward) on the nth plate is
                                      STRUCTURAL THEORY                                         5.125




 FIGURE 5.99 Folded plate is analyzed by first considering a transverse strip (a) as a continuous
 slab on supports that do not settle (b). then, (c) the slabs are assumed hinged and acted upon by
 the reactions computed in the first step and by unknown moments to correct for this assumption.
 (d ) Slab reactions are resolved into plate forces, parallel to the planes of the plates. (e) In the
 longitudinal direction, the plates act as deep girders with shears along the edges. ( ƒ ) Arrows
 indicate the positive directions for the girder shears.




                                           Rn       Rn⫺1
                                Pn ⫽            ⫺                                            (5.179)
                                       kn cos ␾n kn⫺1 cos ␾n

(Figure 5.99d shows the resolution of forces at edge n; n ⫺ 1 is similar.) Equation
(5.179) does not apply for the case of a vertical reaction on a vertical plate, for
R / k is the horizontal component of the reaction.

Step 4. Calculate the midspan (maximum) bending moment in each plate. In this
example, each plate is a simple beam and M ⫽ PL2 / 8, where L is the span in feet.

Step 5. Determine the free-edge longitudinal stresses at midspan. In each plate,
these can be computed from
5.126                               SECTION FIVE


                                    72M            72M
                           ƒn⫺1 ⫽            ƒn ⫽ ⫺                          (5.180)
                                     Ah             Ah

where ƒ is the stress in psi, M the moment in ft-lb from Step 4, A ⫽ plate cross-
sectional area and tension is taken as positive, compression as negative.
Step 6. Apply a shear to adjoining edges to equalize the stresses there. Compute
the adjusted stresses by converging approximations, similar to moment distribution.
To do this, distribute the unbalanced stress at each edge in proportion to the recip-
rocals of the areas of the plates, and use a carry-over factor of ⫺1⁄2 to distribute
the tress to a far edge. Edge 0, being a free edge, requires no distribution of the
stress there. Edge 3, because of symmetry, may be treated the same, and distribution
need be carried out only in the left half of the structure.
Step 7. Compute the midspan edge deflections. In general, the vertical component
␦ can be computed from

                       E
                       L
                         ␦ ⫽
                        2 n
                             kn     冉
                             15 ƒn⫺1 ⫺ ƒn ƒn ⫺ ƒn⫹1
                                    an
                                         ⫺
                                             an⫹1           冊                (5.181)


where E ⫽ modulus of elasticity, psi
      k ⫽ tan ␾n ⫺ tan ␾n⫹1, as in Step 3

The factor E / L2 is retained for convenience; it is eliminated by dividing the si-
multaneous angle equations by it. For a vertical plate, the vertical deflection is
given by

                              E     15( ƒn⫺1 ⫺ ƒn)
                                ␦ ⫽                                          (5.182)
                              L2 n        hn

Step 8. Compute the midspan angle change ␪P at each edge. This can be deter-
mined from

                         E      ␦    ⫺ ␦n  ␦ ⫺ ␦n⫹1
                           ␪ ⫽ ⫺ n⫺1      ⫹ n                                (5.183)
                         L2 P       an        an⫹1

Step 9. To correct the edge rotations with a symmetrical loading, apply an un-
known moment of ⫹100mn sin (␲ x / L), in-lb (positive when clockwise) to plate n
at edge n and ⫺1000mn sin (␲ x / L) to its counterpart, plate n⬘ at edge n⬘. Also,
apply ⫺1000mn sin (␲ x / L) to plate (n ⫹ 1) at edge n and ⫹1000mn sin (␲ x / L)
sine function is assumed to make the loading vary longitudinally in approximately
the same manner as the deflections.) At midspan, the absolute value of these mo-
ments is 1000mn.
   The 12-in-wide transverse strip at midspan, hinged at the supports, will then be
subjected at the supports to moments of 1000mn. Compute the rotations thus caused
in the slabs from
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.127


                          E      166.7hnmn
                            ␪ⴖ ⫽
                          L2 n⫺1    L2t 3n

                               E
                                 ␪ⴖ ⫽
                               L2 n     L2    t 3n冉
                                      333.3mn hn hn⫹1
                                                   ⫹ 3
                                                     t n⫹1    冊                (5.184)

                          E      166.7hn⫹1mn
                            ␪ⴖ ⫽
                          L2 n⫹1    L2t 3n⫹1

Step 10. Compute the slab reactions and plate loads due to the unknown moments.
The reactions are

        Rn⫺1 ⫽
                 1000mn
                   an
                           Rn ⫽ 1000mn      冉  1
                                                 ⫹
                                                   1
                                               an an⫹1冊       Rn⫹1 ⫽ ⫺
                                                                      1000mn
                                                                       an⫹1
                                                                               (5.185)

The plate loads are

                               Pn ⫽
                                        1
                                             冉
                                             Rn Rn⫺1
                                      cos ␾n kn
                                                ⫺
                                                  kn⫺1    冊                    (5.186)

Step 11. Assume that the loading on each plate is Pn sin (␲ x / L) (Fig. 5.99e), and
calculate the midspan (maximum) bending moment. For a simple beam,

                                                PL2
                                          M⫽
                                                ␲2

Step 12. Using Eq. (5.180), compute the free-edge longitudinal stresses at mid-
span. Then, as in Step 6, apply a shear at each edge to equalize the stresses.
Determine the adjusted stresses by converging approximations.
Step 13. Compute the vertical component of the edge deflections at midspan from

                      E
                        ␦ ⫽
                            144
                      L2 n ␲ 2kn      冉   ƒ n⫺1 ⫺ ƒn ƒn ⫺ ƒn⫹1
                                              an
                                                    ⫺
                                                        an⫹1      冊            (5.187)

or for a vertical plate from

                                 E     144( ƒn⫺1 ⫺ ƒn)
                                   ␦ ⫽                                         (5.188)
                                 L2 n       ␲ 2hn
Step 14. Using Eq. (5.183), determine the midspan angle change ␪ ⬘ at each edge.
Step 15. At each edge, set up an equation by putting the sum of the angle changes
equal to zero. Thus, after division by E / L2: ␪P ⫹ ␪ ⴖ ⫹ ⌺␪⬘ ⫽ 0. Solve these
simultaneous equations for the unknown moments.
Step 16. Determine the actual reactions, loads, stresses, and deflections by sub-
stituting for the moments the values just found.
Step 17. Compute the shear stresses. The shear stresses at edge n (Fig. 5.99ƒ ) is
5.128                                      SECTION FIVE


                                                  ƒn⫺1 ⫹ ƒn
                                    Tn ⫽ Tn⫺1               An                                (5.189)
                                                      2
In the example, To ⫽ 0, so the shears at the edges can be obtained successively,
since the stresses ƒ are known.
   For a uniformly loaded folded plate, the shear stress S, psi, at any point on an
edge n is approximately

                                       S⫽          ⫺
                                             3Lt 2 L冉 冊
                                            2Tmax 1 x
                                                                                              (5.190)

With a maximum at plate ends of
                                                     Tmax
                                            Smax ⫽                                            (5.191)
                                                     3Lt
   The shear stress, psi, at middepth (not always a maximum) is


                            vn ⫽   冉 3 PnL Sn⫺1 ⫹ Sn
                                      2An
                                          ⫹
                                               2            冊冉 冊1 x
                                                                 ⫺
                                                                2 L
                                                                                              (5.192)


and has its largest value at x ⫽ 0:
                                          0.75 PnL Sn⫺1 ⫹ Sn
                                 vmax ⫽           ⫹                                           (5.193)
                                             An        4
   For more details, see D. Yitzhaki and Max Reiss, ‘‘Analysis of Folded Plates,’’
Proceedings Paper 3303, Journal of the Structural Division, American Society of
Civil Engineers, October 1962.


5.16     CABLE-SUPPORTED STRUCTURES*

A cable is a linear structural member, like a bar of a truss. The cross-sectional
dimensions of a cable relative to its length, however, are so small that it cannot
withstand bending or compression. Consequently, under loads at an angle to its
longitudinal axis, a cable sags and assumes a shape that enables it to develop tensile
stresses that resist the loads.
    Structural efficiency results from two cable characteristics: (1) uniformity of
tensile stresses over the cable cross section, and (2) usually, small variation of
tension along the longitudinal axis. Hence, it is economical to use materials with
very high tensile strength for cables.
    Cables sometimes are used in building construction as an alternative to such
tension members as hangers, ties, or tension chords of trusses. For example, cables
are used in a form of long-span cantilever-truss construction in which a horizontal


   * Reprinted with permission from F. S. Merritt, ‘‘Structural Steel Designers’ Handboo,’’ McGraw-Hill
Book Company, New York.
                                   STRUCTURAL THEORY                                    5.129


roof girder is supported at one end by a column and near the other end by a cable
that extends diagonally upward to the top of a vertical mast above the column
support (cable-stayed-girder construction, Fig. 5.100). Cable stress an be computed
for this case from the laws of equilibrium.
   Cables also may be used in building construction instead of girders, trusses, or
membranes to support roofs, For the purpose, cables may be arranged in numerous
ways. It is consequently impractical to treat in detail in this book any but the
simplest types of such applications of cables. Instead, general procedures for ana-
lyzing cable-supported structures are presented in the following.


5.16.1   Simple Cables

An ideal cable has o resistance to bending. Thus, in analysis of a cable in equilib-
rium, not only is the sum of the moments about any point equal to zero but so is
the bending moment at any point. Consequently, the equilibrium shape of the cable
corresponds to the funicular, or bending-moment, diagram for the loading (Fig.
5.101a). As a result, the tensile force at any point of the cable is tangent there to
the cable curve.
   The point of maximum sag of a cable coincides with the point of zero shear.
(Sag in this case should be measured parallel to the direction of the shear forces.)
   Stresses in a cable are a function of the deformed shape. Equations needed for
analysis, therefore, usually are nonlinear. Also, in general, stresses and deformations
cannot be obtained accurately by superimposition of loads. A common procedure




 FIGURE 5.100 Two types of cable-stayed girder construction for roofs.




    FIGURE 5.101 Simple cable: (a) cable with a uniformly distributed load; (b) cable with
    supports at different levels.
5.130                                   SECTION FIVE


in analysis is to obtain a solution in steps by using linear equations to approximate
the nonlinear ones and by starting with the initial geometry to obtain better esti-
mates of the final geometry.
   For convenience in analysis, the cable tension, directed along the cable curve,
usually is resolved into two components. Often, it is advantageous to resolve the
tension T into a horizontal component H and a vertical component V (Fig. 5.100b).
Under vertical loading then, the horizontal component is constant along the cable.
Maximum tension occurs at the support. V is zero at the point of maximum sag.
   For a general, distributed vertical load q, the cable must satisfy the second-order
linear differential equation

                                          Hy n ⫽ q                               (5.194)

where y ⫽ rise of cable at distance x from low point (Fig. 5.100b)
     y n ⫽ d 2y / dx 2

Catenary. Weight of a cable of constant cross-section represents a vertical loading
that is uniformly distributed along the length of cable. Under such a loading, a
cable takes the shape of a catenary.
   Take the origin of coordinates at the low point C and measure distance s along
the cable from C (Fig. 5.100b). If qo is the load per unit length of cable, Eq. (5.194)
becomes

                                        qo ds
                               Hy n ⫽         ⫽ qo 兹1 ⫹ y ⬘2                     (5.195)
                                         dx

where y ⬘ ⫽ dy / dx. Solving for y ⬘ gives the slope at any point of the cable

                     y ⬘ ⫽ sinh
                                   qo x qo x
                                    H
                                       ⫽
                                         H
                                             ⫹
                                               1 qo x
                                               3! H    冉 冊  3

                                                                ⫹             (5.196)

A second integration then yields the equation for the cable shape, which is called
a catenary.

                y⫽
                     H
                     qo   冉 q x     q x2
                        cosh o ⫺ 1 ⫽ o
                             H      H 2!
                                         ⫹ 冊
                                           qo
                                           H            冉冊      3
                                                                    x4
                                                                    4!
                                                                       ⫹      (5.197)

If only the first term of the series expansion is used, the cable equation represents
a parabola. Because the parabolic equation usually is easier to handle, a catenary
often is approximated by a parabola.
   For a catenary, length of arc measured from the low point is

                     s⫽
                              H
                              qo
                                     q x
                                 sinh o ⫽ x ⫹
                                      H
                                              1 qo
                                              3! H   冉冊 2

                                                            x3 ⫹              (5.198)

Tension at any point is

                               T ⫽ 兹H 2 ⫹ q o2s2 ⫽ H ⫹ qo y                      (5.199)

The distance from the low point C to the left support L is
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                 5.131



                             a⫽
                                    H
                                    qo        冉
                                              q
                                       cosh⫺1 o ƒL ⫹ 1
                                              H          冊                       (5.200)

where ƒL ⫽ vertical distance from C to L. The distance from C to the right support
R is

                             b⫽
                                    H
                                    qo        冉
                                              q
                                       cosh⫺1 o ƒR ⫹ 1
                                              H          冊                       (5.201)

where ƒR ⫽ vertical distance from C to R.
   Given the sags of a catenary ƒL and ƒR under a distributed vertical load qo, the
horizontal component of cable tension H may be computed from
                  qol
                  H
                      ⫽ cosh⫺1  冉
                               qo ƒL
                                H           冊
                                     ⫹ 1 ⫹ cosh⫺1
                                                  qo ƒR
                                                   H     冉
                                                        ⫹1           冊           (5.202)

where l ⫽ span, or horizontal distance between supports L and R ⫽ a ⫹ b. This
equation usually is solved by trial. A first estimate of H for substitution in the right-
hand side of the equation may be obtained by approximating the catenary by a
parabola. Vertical components of the reactions at the supports can be computed
from
                                       qoa            qb
                         RL ⫽ H sinh       RR ⫽ H sinh o                         (5.203)
                                        H              H

Parabola. Uniform vertical live loads and uniform vertical dead loads other than
cable weight generally may be treated as distributed uniformly over the horizontal
projection of the cable. Under such loadings, a cable takes the shape of a parabola.
   Take the origin of coordinates at the low point C (Fig. 5.100b). If wo is the load
per foot horizontally, Eq. (5.194) becomes
                                       Hy n ⫽ wo                                 (5.204)
Integration gives the slope at any point of the cable
                                              wo x
                                       y⬘ ⫽                                      (5.205)
                                               H
A second integration yields the parabolic equation for the cable shape
                                            wo x 2
                                       y⫽                                        (5.206)
                                             2H
The distance from the low point C to the left support L is
                                           l   Hh
                                      a⫽     ⫺                                   (5.207)
                                           2 wo l
where l ⫽ span, or horizontal distance between supports L and R ⫽ a ⫹ b
     h ⫽ vertical distance between supports
The distance from the low point C to the right support R is
5.132                                               SECTION FIVE


                                                          l   Hh
                                                   b⫽       ⫹                                                (5.208)
                                                          2 wo l
   When supports are not at the same level, the horizontal component of cable
tension H may be computed from

                           H⫽
                                wo l 2
                                 h2            冉   ƒR ⫺
                                                          h
                                                          2
                                                             兹ƒL ƒR   冊   ⫽
                                                                               wo l 2
                                                                                8ƒ
                                                                                                             (5.209)

where ƒL ⫽ vertical distance from C to L
      ƒR ⫽ vertical distance from C to R
       ƒ ⫽ sag of cable measured vertically from chord LR midway between sup-
           ports (at x ⫽ Hh / wo l )
As indicated in Fig. 5.100b,
                                                             h
                                               ƒ ⫽ ƒL ⫹        ⫺ yM                                          (5.210)
                                                             2
where yM ⫽ Hh2 / 2wo l 2. The minus sign should be used in Eq. (5.209) when low
point C is between supports. If the vertex of the parabola is not between L and R,
the plus sign should be used.
   The vertical components of the reactions at the supports can be computed from
                                           wo l Hh                         wo l Hh
                        VL ⫽ woa ⫽             ⫺            VR ⫽ wob ⫽         ⫹                             (5.211)
                                            2    l                          2    l
Tension at any point is
                                               T ⫽ 兹H2 ⫹ w 2o x 2                                            (5.212)
Length of parabolic arc RC is


                    冪 冉 冊                                                      冉冊
                                       2                                                    2
                b            wob                 H      wb       1 wo
        LRC ⫽           1⫹                 ⫹        sinh o ⫽ b ⫹                                b3 ⫹      (5.213)
                2            KH                 2wo      H       6 H
Length of parabolic are LC is


        LLC ⫽
                a
                2   冪
                    1⫹     冉 冊
                             woa
                              H
                                   2

                                           ⫹
                                                H
                                               2wo
                                                       wa
                                                   sinh o ⫽ a ⫹
                                                        H
                                                                1 wo
                                                                6 H            冉冊       2

                                                                                                a3 ⫹      (5.214)

  When supports are at the same level, ƒL ⫽ ƒR ⫽ ƒ, h ⫽ 0, and a ⫽ b ⫽ l / 2.
The horizontal component of cable tension H may be computed from
                                                            wo l2
                                                     H⫽                                                      (5.215)
                                                             8ƒ
The vertical components of the reactions at the supports are
                                                                wo l
                                                   VL ⫽ VR ⫽                                                 (5.216)
                                                                 2
Maximum tension occurs at the supports and equals
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                             5.133




                                                     冪1 ⫹ 16ƒl
                                                              2
                                             wo l
                                TL ⫽ TR ⫽                         2
                                                                              (5.217)
                                              2
Length of cable between supports is

                   L⫽
                        1
                        2   冪   1⫹   冉 冊
                                      wo l
                                      2H
                                             2

                                                 ⫹
                                                     H
                                                     wo
                                                            w l
                                                        sinh o
                                                            2H                (5.218)
                     ⫽l 1⫹  冉
                           8 ƒ 2 32 ƒ 4 256 ƒ 6
                           3 l2
                                ⫺
                                  5 l4
                                       ⫹
                                         7 l6
                                                ⫹                      冊
If additional uniformly distributed load is applied to a parabolic cable, the change
in sag is approximately
                                        15 l     ⌬L
                                 ⌬ƒ ⫽                                         (5.219)
                                        16 ƒ 5 ⫺ 24ƒ 2 / l2
For a rise in temperature t, the change in sag is about

                      ⌬ƒ ⫽
                                15       l2ct
                                16 ƒ (5 ⫺ 24ƒ / l )
                                              2  2
                                                    1⫹    冉
                                                       8 ƒ2
                                                       3 l2           冊       (5.220)

where c ⫽ coefficient of thermal expansion.
  Elastic elongation of a parabolic cable is approximately

                                ⌬L ⫽
                                         Hl
                                        ARE
                                            1⫹   冉
                                               16 ƒ 2
                                               3 l2           冊               (5.221)

where A ⫽ cross-sectional area of cable
      E ⫽ modulus of elasticity of cable steel
      H ⫽ horizontal component of tension in cable
If the corresponding change in sag is small, so that the effect on H is negligible,
this change may be computed from
                                     15 Hl 2 1 ⫹ 16ƒ 2 / 3l 2
                            ⌬ƒ ⫽                                              (5.222)
                                     16 AREƒ 5 ⫺ 24ƒ 2 / l 2
   For the general case of vertical dead load on a cable, the initial shape of the
cable is given by
                                                     MD
                                         yD ⫽                                 (5.223)
                                                     HD
where MD ⫽ dead-load bending moment that would be produced by the load in a
           simple beam
      HD ⫽ horizontal component of tension due to dead load
For the general case of vertical live load on the cable, the final shape of the cable
is given by
                                                 MD ⫹ ML
                                   yD ⫹ ␦ ⫽                                   (5.224)
                                                 HD ⫹ HL
5.134                                    SECTION FIVE


where ␦ ⫽ vertical deflection of cable due to live load
    ML ⫽ live-load bending moment that would be produced by the live load in
          a simple beam
    HL ⫽ increment in horizontal component of tension due to live load
Subtraction of Eq. (5.223) from Eq. (5.224) yield
                                                 ML ⫺ HL yD
                                 ␦⫽                                                                     (5.225)
                                                  HD ⫹ HL
If the cable is assumed to take a parabolic shape, a close approximation to HL may
be obtained from
                         HL
                         AE
                              w
                            K⫽ D
                              HD
                                             冕 ␦ dx ⫺ 21 冕 ␦ ⴖ␦ dx
                                                 l

                                                 0
                                                                        l

                                                                        0
                                                                                                        (5.226)


  K⫽l   冋冉1 5 16ƒ 2
          4 2
              ⫹ 2
                l      冊冪   1⫹
                                 16ƒ 2
                                  l2
                                       ⫹
                                          3l
                                         32 ƒ
                                              loge
                                                   4ƒ
                                                    l
                                                      ⫹             冉 冪              1⫹
                                                                                          16 ƒ 2
                                                                                           l2      冊册   (5.227)

where ␦ ⴖ ⫽ d 2␦ / dx 2.
  If elastic elongation and ␦ ⴖ can be ignored, Eq. (5.226) simplifies to

                                冕 M dx 3
                                 l



                              ⫽
                                 0
                                      ⫽     冕M
                                             L                      l



                                冕 y dx 2 ƒl
                         HL          l                                      L   dx                      (5.228)
                                                                0
                                             D
                                 0


Thus, for a load uniformly distributed horizontally wL,

                                 冕M  0
                                         l

                                                 L   dx ⫽
                                                            wLl 3
                                                             12
                                                                                                        (5.229)

and the increase in the horizontal component of tension due to live load is
                          3 wLl 3 wLl 2 wLl 2 8HD  w
                  HL ⫽           ⫽     ⫽          ⫽ L H                                                 (5.230)
                         2 ƒl 12   8ƒ    8 wD l 2 wD D
When a more accurate solution is desired, the value of HL obtained from Eq. (5.230)
can be used for an initial trial in solving Eqs. (5.225) and (5.226).
   (S. P. Timoshenko and D. H. Young, ‘‘Theory of Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York: W. T. O’Brien and A. J. Francis, ‘‘Cable Movements under
Two-dimensional Loads,’’ Journal of the Structural Division, ASCE, Vol. 90, No.
ST3, Proceedings Paper 3929, June 1964, pp. 89–123; W. T. O’Brien, ‘‘General
Solution of Suspended Cable Problems,’’ Journal of the Structural Division, ASCE,
Vol. 93, No. ST1, Proceedings Paper 5085, February, 1967, pp. 1–26; W. T.
O’Brien, ‘‘Behavior of Loaded Cable Systems,’’ Journal of the Structural Division,
ASCE, Vol. 94, No. ST10, Proceedings Paper 6162, October 1968, pp. 2281–2302;
G. R. Buchanan, ‘‘Two-dimensional Cable Analysis,’’ Journal of the Structural
Division, ASCE, Vol. 96, No. ST7, Proceedings Paper 7436, July 1970, pp. 1581–
1587).
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.135


5.16.2   Cable Systems

Analysis of simple cables is described in Art. 5.16.1. Cables, however, may be
assembled into many types of systems. One important reason for such systems is
that roofs to be supported are two- or three-dimensional. Consequently, three-
dimensional cable arrangements often are advantageous. Another important reason
is that cable systems can be designed to offer much higher resistance to vibrations
than simple cables do.
    Like simple cables, cable systems behave nonlinearly. Thus, accurate analysis is
difficult, tedious, and time-consuming. As a result, many designers use approximate
methods that appear to have successfully withstood the test of time. Because of the
numerous types of systems and the complexity of analysis, only general procedures
will be outlined in this article.
    Cable systems may be stiffened or unstiffened. Stiffened systems, usually used
for suspension bridges are rarely used in buildings. This article will deal only with
unstiffened systems, that is, systems where loads are carried to supports only by
cables.
    Often, unstiffened systems may be classified as a network or as a cable truss,
or double-layered plane system.
    Networks consist of two or three sets of cables intersecting at an angle (Fig.
5.102). The cables are fastened together at their intersections.
    Cable trusses consist of pairs of cables, generally in a vertical plane. One cable
of each pair is concave downward, the other concave upward (Fig. 5.103).

Cable Trusses. Both cables of a cable truss are initially tensioned, or prestressed,
to a predetermined shape, usually parabolic. The prestress is made large enough
that any compression that may be induced in a cable by loads only reduces the
tension in the cable; thus, compressive stresses cannot occur. The relative vertical
position of the cables is maintained by verticals, or spreaders, or by diagonals.
Diagonals in the truss plane do not appear to increase significantly the stiffness of
a cable truss.
   Figure 5.103 shows four different arrangements of the cables, with spreaders, in
a cable truss. The intersecting types (Fig. 5.103b and c) usually are stiffer than the
others, for given size cables and given sag and rise.




                   FIGURE 5.102 Cable network.
5.136                                  SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.103 Planar cable systems: (a) completely separated cables; (b) cables intersecting at
midspan; (c) crossing cables; (d ) cables meeting at supports.



   For supporting roofs, cable trusses often are placed radially at regular intervals
(Fig. 5.104). Around the perimeter of the roof, the horizontal component of the
tension usually is resisted by a circular or elliptical compression ring. To avoid a
joint with a jumble of cables at the center, the cables usually are also connected to
a tension ring circumscribing the center.
   Properly prestressed, such double-layer cable systems offer high resistance to
vibrations. Wind or other dynamic forces difficult or impossible to anticipate may
cause resonance to occur in a single cable, unless damping is provided. The prob-
ability of resonance occurring may be reduced by increasing the dead load on a
single cable. But this is not economical, because the size of cable and supports
usually must be increased as well. Besides, the tactic may not succeed, because
future loads may be outside the design range. Damping, however, may be achieved
economically with interconnected cables under different tensions, for example, with
cable trusses or networks.
   The cable that is concave downward (Fig. 5.103) usually is considered the load-
carrying cable. If the prestress in that cable exceeds that in the other cable, the




              FIGURE 5.104 Cable trusses placed radially to support a round
              roof.
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.137


natural frequencies of vibration of both cables will always differ for any value of
live load. To avoid resonance, the difference between the frequencies of the cables
should increase with increase in load. Thus, the two cables will tend to assume
different shapes under specific dynamic loads. As a consequence, the resulting flow
of energy from one cable to the other will dampen the vibrations of both cables.
    Natural frequency, cycles per second, of each cable may be estimated from


                                                冪Tgw
                                           n␲
                                    wn ⫽                                       (5.231)
                                            l

where n ⫽ integer, 1 for the fundamental mode of vibration, 2 for the second
           mode, . . .
       l ⫽ span of cable, ft
      w ⫽ load on cable, kips per ft
      g ⫽ acceleration due to gravity ⫽ 32.2 ft / s2
      T ⫽ cable tension, kips

   The spreaders of a cable truss impose the condition that under a given load the
change in sag of the cables must be equal. But the changes in tension of the two
cables may not be equal. If the ratio of sag to span ƒ /l is small (less than about
0.1). Eq. (5.222) indicates that, for a parabolic cable, the change in tension is given
approximately by

                                        16 AE ƒ
                                 ⌬H ⫽           ⌬ƒ                             (5.232)
                                        3 l2

where ⌬ ƒ ⫽ change in sag
       A ⫽ cross-sectional area of cable
       E ⫽ modulus of elasticity of cable steel

   Double cables interconnected with struts may be analyzed as discrete or contin-
uous systems. For a discrete system, the spreaders are treated as individual mem-
bers. For a continuous system, the spreaders are replaced by a continuous dia-
phragm that ensures that the changes in sag and rise of cables remain equal under
changes in load. Similarly, for analysis of a cable network, the cables, when treated
as a continuous system, may be replaced by a continuous membrane.
   (C. H. Mollman, ‘‘Analysis of Plane Prestressed Cable Structures,’’ Journal of
the Structural Division, ASCE, Vol. 96, No. ST10, Proceedings Paper 7598,
October 1970, pp. 2059–2082; D. P. Greenberg, ‘‘Inelastic Analysis of Suspension
Roof Structures,’’ Journal of the Structural Division, ASCE, Vol. 96, No. ST5,
Proceedings Paper 7284, May 1970, pp. 905–930; H. Tottenham and P. G. Wil-
liams, ‘‘Cable Net: Continuous System Analysis,’’ Journal of the Engineering Me-
chanics Division, ASCE, Vol. 96, No. EM3, Proceedings Paper 7347, June 1970,
pp. 277–293; A. Siev, ‘‘A General Analysis of Prestressed Nets,’’ Publications,
International Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering, Vol. 23, pp. 283–
292, Zurich, Switzerland, 1963; A. Siev, ‘‘Stress Analysis of Prestressed Suspended
Roofs,’’ Journal of the Structural Division, ASCE, Vol. 90, No. ST4, Proceedings
Paper 4008. August 1964, pp. 103–121; C. H. Thornton and C. Birnstiel, ‘‘Three-
dimensional Suspension Structures,’’ Journal of the Structural Division, ASCE, Vol.
93, No. ST2, Proceedings Paper 5196, April 1967, pp. 247–270.)
5.138                                SECTION FIVE


5.17     AIR-STABILIZED STRUCTURES

A true membrane is able to withstand tension but is completely unable to resist
bending. Although it is highly efficient structurally, like a shell, a membrane must
be much thinner than a shell and therefore can be made of a very lightweight
material, such as fabric, with considerable reduction in dead load compared with
other types of construction. Such a thin material, however, would buckle if sub-
jected to compression. Consequently, a true membrane, when loaded, deflects and
assumes a shape that enables it to develop tensile stresses that resist the loads.
    Membranes may be used for the roof of a building or as a complete exterior
enclosure. One way to utilize a membrane for these purposes is to hang it with
initial tension between appropriate supports. For example, a tent may be formed by
supporting fabric atop one or more tall posts and anchoring the outer edges of the
stretched fabric to the ground. As another example, a dish-shaped roof may be
constructed by stretching a membrane and anchoring it to the inner surface of a
ring girder. In both examples, loads induce only tensile stresses in the membrane.
The stresses may be computed from the laws of equilibrium, because a membrane
is statically determinate.
    Another way to utilize a membrane as an enclosure or roof is to pretension the
membrane to enable it to carry compressive loads. For the purpose, forces may be
applied, and retained as long as needed, around the edges or over the surface of
the membrane to induce tensile stresses that are larger than the larger compressive
stresses that loads will impose. As a result, compression due to loads will only
reduce the prestress and the membrane will always be subjected only to tensile
stresses.


5.17.1   Pneumatic Construction

A common method of pretensioning a membrane enclosure is to pressurize the
interior with air. Sufficient pressure is applied to counteract dead loads, so that the
membrane actually floats in space. Slight additional pressurization is also used to
offset wind and other anticipated loads. Made of lightweight materials, a membrane
thus can span large distances economically. This type of construction, however, has
the disadvantage that energy is continuously required for operation of air compres-
sors to maintain interior air at a higher pressure than that outdoors.
    Pressure differentials used in practice are not large. They often range between
0.02 and 0.04 psi (3 and 5 psf). Air must be continually supplied, because of
leakage. While there may be some leakage of air through the membrane, more
important sources of air loss are the entrances and exits to the structure. Air locks
and revolving doors, however, can reduce these losses.
    An air-stabilized enclosure, in effect is a membrane bag held in place by small
pressure differentials applied by environmental energy. Such a structure is analo-
gous to a soap film. The shape of a bubble is determined by surface-tension forces.
The membrane is stressed equally in all directions at every point. Consequently,
the film forms shapes with minimum surface area, frequently spherical. Because of
the stress distribution, any shape that can be obtained with soap films is feasible
for an air-stabilized enclosure. Figure 5.105c shows a configuration formed by a
conglomeration of bubbles as an illustration of a shape that can be adopted for an
air-stabilized structure.
    In practice, shapes of air-stabilized structures often resemble those used for thin-
shell enclosures. For example, spherical domes (Fig. 5.105a) are frequently con-
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                                    5.139




   FIGURE 5.105 Some shapes for air-supported structures. (Reprinted with permission
   from F. S. Merritt, ‘‘Building Engineering and Systems Design,’’ Van Nostrand Reinhold
   Company, New York.)



structed with a membrane. Also, membranes are sometimes shaped as semi-circular
cylinders with quarter-sphere ends (Fig. 5.105b).
    Air-stabilized enclosures may be classified as air-inflated, air-supported, or hy-
brid structures, depending on the type of support.
    Air-inflated enclosures are completely supported by pressurized air entrapped
within membranes. There are two main types, inflated-rib structures and inflated
dual-wall structures.
    In inflated-rib construction, the membrane enclosure is supported by a frame-
work of air-pressurized tubes, which serve much like arch ribs in thin-shell con-
struction (Art. 5.15.1). The principle of their action is demonstrated by a water
hose. A flexible hose, when empty, collapses under its own weight on short spans
or under loads normal to its length; but it stiffens when filled with water. The water
pressure tensions the hose walls and enables them to withstand compressive
stresses.
    In inflated dual-walled construction, pressurized air is trapped between two con-
centric membranes (Fig. 5.106). The shape of the inner membrane is maintained
by suspending it from the outer one. Because of the large volume of air compressed
between the membranes, this type of construction can span longer distances than
can inflated-rib structures.
    Because of the variation of air pressure with changes in temperature, provision
must be made for adjustment of the pressure of the compressed air in air-inflated
structures. Air must be vented to relieve excessive pressures, to prevent overten-
sioning of the membranes. Also, air must be added to compensate for pressure
drops, to prevent collapse.
    Air-supported enclosures consist of a single membrane supported by the dif-
ference between internal air pressure and external atmospheric pressure (Fig. 5.107).
The pressure differential deflects the membrane outward, inducing tensile stresses
in it, thus enabling it to withstand compressive forces. To resist the uplift, the
construction must be securely anchored to the ground. Also, the membrane must
be completely sealed around its perimeter to prevent air leakage.
    Hybrid structures consist of one of the preceding types of pneumatic construc-
tion augmented by light metal framing, such as cables. The framing may be merely




FIGURE 5.106 Inflated dual-wall structure.     FIGURE 5.107 Air-supported structure.
5.140                                SECTION FIVE


a safety measure to support the membrane if pressure should be lost or a means of
shaping the membrane when it is stretched. Under normal conditions, air pressure
against the membrane reduces the load on the framing from heavy wind and snow
loads.


5.17.2   Membrane Stresses

Air-supported structures are generally spherical or cylindrical because of the sup-
porting uniform pressure.
   When a spherical membrane with radius R, in, its subjected to a uniform radial
internal pressure, p, psi, the internal unit tensile force, lb / in, in any direction, is
given by
                                             pR
                                        T⫽                                       (5.233)
                                              2
   In a cylindrical membrane, the internal unit tensile force, lb / in, in the circum-
ferential direction is given by
                                        T ⫽ pR                                   (5.234)
where R ⫽ radius, in, of the cylinder. The longitudinal membrane stress depends
on the conditions at the cylinder ends. For example, with immovable end enclo-
sures, the longitudinal stress would be small. If, however the end enclosure is
flexible, a tension about half that given by Eq. (5.234) would be imposed on the
membrane in the longitudinal direction.
    Unit stress in the membrane can be computed by dividing the unit force by the
thickness, in, of the membrane.
    (R. N. Dent, ‘‘Principles of Pneumatic Architecture,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York; J. W. Leonard, ‘‘Tension Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Com-
pany, New York.)



5.18     STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS

Article 5.1.1 notes that loads can be classified as static or dynamic and that the
distinguishing characteristic is the rate of application of load. If a load is applied
slowly, it may be considered static. Since dynamic loads may produce stresses and
deformations considerably larger than those caused by static loads of the same
magnitude, it is important to know reasonably accurately what is meant by slowly.
    A useful definition can be given in terms of the natural period of vibration of
the structure or member to which the load is applied. If the time in which a load
rises from zero to its maximum value is more than double the natural period, the
load may be treated as static. Loads applied more rapidly may be dynamic. Struc-
tural analysis and design for such loads are considerably different from and more
complex than those for static loads.
    In general, exact dynamic analysis is possible only for relatively simple struc-
tures, and only when both the variation of load and resistance with time are a
convenient mathematical function. Therefore, in practice, adoption of approximate
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.141


methods that permit rapid analysis and design is advisable. And usually, because
of uncertainties in loads and structural resistance, computations need not be carried
out with more than a few significant figures, to be consistent with known conditions.


5.18.1   Properties of Materials under Dynamic Loading

In general mechanical properties of structural materials improve with increasing
rate of load application. For low-carbon steel, for example, yield strength, ultimate
strength, and ductility rise with increasing rate of strain. Modulus of elasticity in
the elastic range, however, is unchanged. For concrete, the dynamic ultimate
strength in compression may be much greater than the static strength.
    Since the improvement depends on the material and the rate of strain, values to
use in dynamic analysis and design should be determined by tests approximating
the loading conditions anticipated.
    Under many repetitions of loading, though, a member or connection between
members may fail because of ‘‘fatigue’’ at a stress smaller than the yield point of
the material. In general, there is little apparent deformation at the start of a fatigue
failure. A crack forms at a point of high stress concentration. As the stress is
repeated, the crack slowly spreads, until the member ruptures without measurable
yielding. Though the material may be ductile, the fracture looks brittle.
    Some materials (generally those with a well-defined yield point) have what is
known as an endurance limit. This is the maximum unit stress that can be repeated,
through a definite range, an indefinite number of times without causing structural
damage. Generally, when no range is specified, the endurance limit is intended for
a cycle in which the stress is varied between tension and compression stresses of
equal value.
    A range of stress may be resolved into two components—a steady, or mean,
stress and an alternating stress. The endurance limit sometimes is defined as the
maximum value of the alternating stress that can be superimposed on the steady
stress an indefinitely large number of times without causing fracture.
    Design of members to resist repeated loading cannot be executed with the cer-
tainty with which members can be designed to resist static loading. Stress concen-
trations may be present for a wide variety of reasons, and it is not practicable to
calculate their intensities. But sometimes it is possible to improve the fatigue
strength of a material or to reduce the magnitude of a stress concentration below
the minimum value that will cause fatigue failure.
    In general, avoid design details that cause severe stress concentrations or poor
stress distribution. Provide gradual changes in section. Eliminate sharp corners and
notches. Do not use details that create high localized constraint. Locate unavoidable
stress raisers at points where fatigue conditions are the least severe. Place connec-
tions at points where stress is low and fatigue conditions are not severe. Provide
structures with multiple load paths or redundant members, so that a fatigue crack
in any one of the several primary members is not likely to cause collapse of the
entire structure.
    Fatigue strength of a material may be improved by cold-working the material
in the region of stress concentration, by thermal processes, or by prestressing it in
such a way as to introduce favorable internal stresses. Where fatigue stresses are
unusually severe, special materials may have to be selected with high energy ab-
sorption and notch toughness.
    (J. H. Faupel, ‘‘Engineering Design,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York;
C. H. Norris et al., ‘‘Structural Design for Dynamic Loads,’’ McGraw-Hill Book
5.142                                  SECTION FIVE


Company, New York; W. H. Munse, ‘‘Fatigue of Welded Steel Structures,’’ Welding
Research Council, 345 East 47th Street, New York, NY 10017.)


5.18.2   Natural Period of Vibration

A preliminary step in dynamic analysis and design is determination of this period.
It can be computed in many ways, including by application of the laws of conser-
vation of energy and momentum or Newton’s second law, F ⫽ M(dv / dt), where F
is force, M mass, v velocity, and t time. But in general, an exact solution is possible
only for simple structures. Therefore, it is general practice to seek an approximate—
but not necessarily inexact—solution by analyzing an idealized representation of
the actual member or structure. Setting up this model and interpreting the solution
require judgment of a high order.
    Natural period of vibration is the time required for a structure to go through one
cycle of free vibration, that is, vibration after the disturbance causing the motion
has ceased.
    To compute the natural period, the actual structure may be conveniently repre-
sented by a system of masses and massless springs, with additional resistances
provided to account for energy losses due to friction, hysteresis, and other forms
of damping. In simple cases, the masses may be set equal to the actual masses;
otherwise, equivalent masses may have to be computed (Art. 5.18.6). The spring
constants are the ratios of forces to deflections.
    For example, a single mass on a spring (Fig. 5.108b) may represent a simply
supported beam with mass that may be considered negligible compared with the
load W at midspan (Fig. 5.108a). The spring constant k should be set equal to the




             FIGURE 5.108 Mass on a weightless spring (b) or (d ) may repre-
             sent the motion of (a) a beam or (c) a rigid frame in free vibration.
                                  STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.143


load that produces a unit deflection at midspan; thus, k ⫽ 48EI / L3, where E is the
modulus of elasticity, psi; I the moment of inertia, in4; and L the span, in, of the
beam. The idealized mass equals W / g, where W is the weight of the load, lb, and
g is the acceleration due to gravity, 386 in / s2.
    Also, a single mass on a spring (Fig. 5.108d ) may represent the rigid frame in
Fig. 5.108c. In that case, k ⫽ 2 ⫻ 12EI / h3, where I is the moment of inertia, in4,
of each column and h the column height, in. The idealized mass equals the sum of
the masses on the girder and the girder mass. (Weight of columns and walls is
assumed negligible.)
    The spring and mass in Fig. 5.108b and d form a one-degree system. The degree
of a system is determined by the least number of coordinates needed to define the
positions of its components. In Fig. 5.108, only the coordinate y is needed to locate
the mass and determine the state of the spring. In a two-degree system, such as
one comprising two masses connected to each other and to the ground by springs
and capable of movement in only one direction, two coordinates are required to
locate the masses.
    If the mass with weight W, lb, in Fig. 5.108 is isolated, as shown in Fig. 5.108e
it will be in dynamic equilibrium under the action of the spring force ⫺ ky and the
inertia force (d 2y / dt 2)(W / g). Hence, the equation of motion is

                                   W d 2y
                                          ⫹ ky ⫽ 0                             (5.235)
                                   g dt 2

where y ⫽ displacement of mass, in, measured from rest position. Equation (5.235)
may be written in the more convenient form

                           d 2y kg     d 2y
                              2
                                ⫹   y ⫽ 2 ⫹ ␻2y ⫽ 0                            (5.236)
                           dt     W    dt

The solution is

                                y ⫽ A sin ␻t ⫹ B cos ␻t                        (5.237)

where A and B are constants to be determined from initial conditions of the system,
and


                                       ␻⫽   冪kgW                               (5.238)


is the natural circular frequency, rad / s.
    The motion defined by Eq. (5.237) is harmonic. Its natural period, s, is


                                  T⫽
                                       2␲
                                       ␻
                                          ⫽ 2␲     冪kgW                        (5.239)


Its natural frequency, Hz, is
5.144                                      SECTION FIVE




                                      ƒ⫽
                                                 1
                                                   ⫽
                                                 T 2␲
                                                     1
                                                           冪kgW                   (5.240)

    If, at time t ⫽ 0, the mass has an initial displacement y0 and velocity v0, sub-
stitution in Eq. (5.237) yields A ⫽ v0 / ␻ and B ⫽ y0. Hence, at any time t, the mass
is completely located by
                                      v0
                              y⫽         sin ␻t ⫹ y0 cos ␻t                       (5.241)
                                      ␻

The stress in the spring can be computed from the displacement y.

Vibrations of Lumped Masses. In multiple-degree systems, an independent dif-
ferential equation of motion can be written for each degree of freedom. Thus, in
an N-degree system with N masses, weighing W1, W2, . . . , WN lb, and N2 springs
with constants krj (r ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , N; j ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , N), there are N equations of
the form

                                冘k y ⫽0
                                N
                   Wr d 2yr
                            ⫹             rj j              r ⫽ 1, 2, . . . , N   (5.242)
                   g dt 2       j⫽1


Simultaneous solution of these equations reveals that the motion of each mass can
be resolved into N harmonic components. They are called the fundamental, second
third, etc., harmonics. Each set of harmonics for all the masses is called a normal
mode of vibration.
    There are as many normal modes in a system as degrees of freedom. Under
certain circumstances, the system could vibrate freely in any one of these modes.
During any such vibration, the ratio of displacement of any two of the masses
remains constant. Hence, the solution of Eqs. (5.242) take the form

                                      冘a
                                          N
                              yr ⫽               rn   sin ␻n(t ⫹ ␶n)              (5.243)
                                      n⫽1


where arn and ␶n are constants to be determined from the initial conditions of the
system and ␻n is the natural circular frequency for each normal mode.
   To determine ␻n, set y1 ⫽ A1 sin ␻t; y2 ⫽ A2 sin ␻t . . . . Then, substitute these
values of yr and their second derivatives in Eqs. (5.242). After dividing each equa-
tion by sin ␻t, the following N equations result:

                   冉 k11 ⫺
                             W1 2
                             g        冊
                               ␻ A1 ⫹ k12 A2 ⫹    ⫹ k1N AN ⫽ 0


                                 冉
                       k21 A1 ⫹ k22 ⫺
                                      W2
                                       g              冊
                                           A2 ⫹    ⫹ k2N AN ⫽ 0
                                                                                  (5.244)
                 .................................................

                 kN1 A1 ⫹ kN2 A2 ⫹    ⫹ kNN ⫺      冉           WN 2
                                                                  g    冊
                                                                    ␻ AN ⫽ 0

If there are to be nontrivial solutions for the amplitudes A1, A2, . . . , AN, the
determinant of their coefficients must be zero. Thus,
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                             5.145




   冤                                                                 冥
                W1 2
        k11 ⫺     ␻           k12                         k1N
                g
                              W2 2             k2N N
             k21         k22 ⫺    ␻
                               g
       .....................................................             ⫽ 0 (5.245)

             kN1              kN2                          W
                                                      kNN ⫺     ␻2
                                                              g




Solution of this equation for ␻ yields one real root for each normal mode. And the
natural period for each normal mode can be obtained from Eq. (5.239).
   If ␻ for a normal mode now is substituted in Eqs. (5.244), the amplitudes A1,
A2, . . . , AN for that mode can be computed in terms of an arbitrary value, usually
unity, assigned to one of them. The resulting set of modal amplitudes defines the
characteristic shape for that mode.
   The normal modes are mutually orthogonal; that is,

                                    冘WA
                                    N

                                          r   rn   Arm ⫽ 0                   (5.246)
                                    r⫽1


where Wr is the rth mass out of a total of N, A represents the characteristic ampli-
tude of a normal mode, and n and m identify any two normal modes. Also, for a
total of S springs

                                     冘ky
                                      S
                                               y
                                          s sn sm    ⫽0                      (5.247)
                                    s⫽1


where ks is the constant for the sth spring and y represents the spring distortion.
   When there are many degrees of freedom, this procedure for analyzing free
vibration becomes very lengthy. In such cases, it may be preferable to solve Eqs.
(5.244) by numerical, trial-and-error procedures, such as the Stodola-Vianello
method. In that method, the solution converges first on the highest or lowest mode.
Then, the other modes are determined by the same procedure after elimination of
one of the equations by use of Eq. (5.246). The procedure requires assumption of
a characteristic shape, a set of amplitudes Ar1. These are substituted in one of Eqs.
(5.244) to obtain a first approximation of ␻ 2. With this value and with AN1 ⫽ 1,
the remaining N ⫺ 1 equations are solved to obtain a new set of Ar1. Then, the
procedure is repeated until assumed and final characteristic amplitudes agree.
   Because even this procedure is very lengthy for many degrees of freedom, the
Rayleigh approximate method may be used to compute the fundamental mode. The
frequency obtained by this method, however, may be a little on the high side.
   The Rayleigh method also starts with an assumed set of characteristic amplitudes
Ar1 and depends for its success on the small error in natural frequency produced
by a relatively large error in the shape assumption. Next, relative inertia forces
acting at each mass are computed: Fr ⫽ Wr Ar1 / AN1, where AN1 is the assumed
displacement at one of the masses. These forces are applied to the system as a
5.146                                      SECTION FIVE


static load and displacements Br1 due to them calculated. Then, the natural fre-
quency can be obtained from

                                                  冘FB
                                                               N
                                                          g                r     r1
                                                               r⫽1
                                       ␻2       ⫽                                                                      (5.248)
                                                  冘WB
                                                              N
                                                                                2
                                                                       r        r1
                                                          r⫽1


where g is the acceleration due to gravity, 386 in / s2. For greater accuracy, the
computation can be repeated with Br1 as the assumed characteristic amplitudes.
    When the Rayleigh method is applied to beams, the characteristic shape assumed
initially may be chosen conveniently as the deflection curve for static loading.
    The Rayleigh method may be extended to determination of higher modes by the
Schmidt orthogonalization procedure, which adjusts assumed deflection curves to
satisfy Eq. (5.246). The procedure is to assume a shape, remove components as-
sociated with lower modes, then use the Rayleigh method for the residual deflection
curve. The computation will converge on the next higher mode. The method is
shorter than the Stodola-Vianello procedure when only a few modes are needed.
    For example, suppose the characteristic amplitudes Ar1 for the fundamental mode
have been obtained and the natural frequency for the second mode is to be com-
puted. Assume a value for the relative deflection of the rth mass Ar2. Then, the
shape with the fundamental mode removed will be defined by the displacements
                                       ar2 ⫽ Ar2 ⫺ c1Ar1                                                               (5.249)
where c1 is the participation factor for the first mode.

                                       冘WA A
                                                      N

                                                                   r       r2        r1
                                                     r⫽1
                                   c ⫽                                                                                 (5.250)
                                       冘WA
                                       1                N
                                                                                2
                                                                       r        r1
                                                          r⫽1


Substitute ar2 for Br1 in Eq. (5.248) to find the second-mode frequency and, from
deflections produced by Fr ⫽ Wr ar2, an improved shape. (For more rapid coverg-
ence, Ar2 should be selected to make c1 small.) The procedure should be repeated,
starting with the new shape.
   For the third mode, assume deflections Ar3 and remove the first two modes:
                                Ar3 ⫽ Ar3 ⫺ c1Ar1 ⫺ c2Ar2                                                              (5.251)
The participation factors are determined from

                         冘WA A                                           冘WA A
                            N                                                         N

                                   r       r3        r1                                         r       r3        r2
                           r⫽1                                                       r⫽1
                     c ⫽                                             c ⫽                                               (5.252)
                         冘WA                                             冘WA
                       1      N                                        2                N
                                                2                                                            2
                                       r        r1                                                  r        r2
                             r⫽1                                                          r⫽1


Use ar3 to find an improved shape and the third-mode frequency.

Vibrations of Distributed Masses. For some structures with mass distributed
throughout, it sometimes is easier to solve the dynamic equations based on distrib-
uted mass than the equations based on equivalent lumped masses. A distributed
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.147


mass has an infinite number of degrees of freedom and normal modes. Every par-
ticle in it can be considered a lumped mass on springs connected to other particles.
Usually, however, only the fundamental mode is significant, though sometimes the
second and third modes must be taken into account.
    For example, suppose a beam weighs w lb / lin ft and has a modulus of elasticity
E, psi, and moment of inertia I, in4. Let y be the deflection at a distance x from
one end. Then, the equation of motion is
                                     ⭸4y    w ⭸2y
                                EI        ⫹        ⫽0                         (5.253)
                                     ⭸x 4
                                            g ⭸t 2
(This equation ignores the effects of shear and rotational inertia.) The deflection yn
for each mode, to satisfy the equation, must be the product of a harmonic function
of time ƒn(t) and of the characteristic shape Yn(x), a function of x with undetermined
amplitude. The solution is
                           ƒn(t) ⫽ c1 sin ␻nt ⫹ c2 cos ␻nt                    (5.254)
where ␻n is the natural circular frequency and n indicates the mode, and
        Yn(x) ⫽ An sin ␤n x ⫹ Bn cos ␤n x ⫹ Cn sinh ␤n x ⫹ Dn cosh ␤n x       (5.255)
where


                                             冪wEIg␻
                                                       2
                                     ␤n ⫽        4     n
                                                                              (5.256)

   For a simple beam, the boundary (support) conditions for all values of time t
are y ⫽ 0 and bending moment M ⫽ EI ⭸2y / ⭸x 2 ⫽ 0. Hence, at x ⫽ 0 and x ⫽ L,
the span length, Yn(x) ⫽ 0 and d2Yn / dx 2 ⫽ 0. These conditions require that
                                                                  n␲
                           Bn ⫽ Cn ⫽ Dn ⫽ 0                ␤n ⫽
                                                                   L
to satisfy Eq. (5.255). Hence, according to Eq. (5.256), the natural circular fre-
quency for a simply supported beam is


                                                     冪EIgw
                                           n 2␲ 2
                                  ␻n ⫽                                        (5.257)
                                             L2
The characteristic shape is defined by
                                                      n␲x
                                  Yn(x) ⫽ sin                                 (5.258)
                                                       L
The constants c1 and c2 in Eq. (5.254) are determined by the initial conditions of
the disturbance. Thus, the total deflection, by superposition of modes, is

                                     冘 A (t) sin n␲L x
                                      ⬀
                               y⫽            n                                (5.259)
                                     n⫽1


where An(t) is determined by the load (see Art. 5.18.4).
   Equations (5.254) to (5.256) apply to spans with any type of end restraints.
Figure 5.109 shows the characteristic shape and gives constants for determination
5.148                                   SECTION FIVE




FIGURE 5.109 Coefficients for computing natural circular frequencies ␻ and natural periods of
vibration T, s, of prismatic beams. w ⫽ weight of beam, lb / lin ft; L ⫽ span, ft; E ⫽ modulus of
elasticity of the beam material, psi; I ⫽ moment of inertia of the beam cross section, in4.


of natural circular frequency ␻ and natural period T for the first four modes of
cantilever simply supported, fixed-end, and fixed-hinged beams. To obtain ␻, select
the appropriate constant from Fig. 5.109 and multiply it by 兹EI/ wL4. where L ⫽
span of beam, ft. To get T, divide the appropriate constant by 兹EI/ wL4.
   To determine the characteristic shapes and natural periods for beams with vari-
able cross section and mass, use the Rayleigh method. Convert the beam into a
lumped-mass system by dividing the span into elements and assuming the mass of
each element to be concentrated at its center. Also, compute all quantities, such as
deflection and bending moment, at the center of each element. Start with an as-
sumed characteristic shape and apply Eq. (5.255).
   Methods are available for dynamic analysis of continuous beams. (R. Clough
and J. Penzien, ‘‘Dynamics of Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
York; D. G. Fertis and E. C. Zobel, ‘‘Transverse Vibration Theory,’’ The Ronald
Press Company, New York.) But even for beams with constant cross section, these
procedures are very lengthy. Generally, approximate solutions are preferable.
   (J. M. Biggs, ‘‘Introduction to Structural Dynamics,’’ McGraw-Hill Book Com-
pany, New York; N. M. Newmark and E. Rosenblueth, ‘‘Fundamentals of Earth-
quake Engineering,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.)

5.18.3   Impact and Sudden Loads
Under impact, there is an abrupt exchange or absorption of energy and drastic
change in velocity. Stresses caused in the colliding members may be several times
larger than stresses produced by the same weights applied statically.
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                  5.149


    An approximation of impact stresses in the elastic range can be made by ne-
glecting the inertia of the body struck and the effect of wave propagation and
assuming that the kinetic energy is converted completely into strain energy in that
body. Consider a prismatic bar subjected to an axial impact load in tension. The
energy absorbed per unit of volume when the bar is stressed to the proportional
limit is called the modulus of resilience. It is given by ƒ 2y / 2E, where ƒy is the yield
stress and E the modulus of elasticity, both in psi.
    Below the proportional limit, the unit stress, psi, due to an axial load U, in-lb,
is


                                      ƒ⫽    冪2UE
                                              AL
                                                                                  (5.260)

where A is the cross-sectional area, in2, and L the length of bar, in. This equation
indicates that, for a given unit stress, energy absorption of a member may be im-
proved by increasing its length or area. Sharp changes in cross section should be
avoided, however, because of associated high stress concentrations. Also, uneven
distribution of stress in a member due to changes in section should be avoided. For
example, if part of a member is given twice the diameter of another part, the stress
under axial load in the larger portion is one-fourth that in the smaller. Since the
energy absorbed is proportional to the square of the stress, the energy taken per
unit of volume by the larger portion is therefore only one-sixteenth that absorbed
by the smaller. So despite the increase in volume caused by doubling of the di-
ameter, the larger portion absorbs much less energy than the smaller. Thus, energy
absorption would be larger with a uniform stress distribution throughout the length
of the member.

Impact on Short Members. If a static axial load W would produce a tensile stress
ƒ⬘ in the bar and an elongation e⬘, in, then the axial stress produced in a short
member when W falls a distance h, in, is


                                               冪1 ⫹ e⬘
                                                      2h
                                ƒ ⫽ ƒ⬘ ⫹ ƒ⬘                                       (5.261)

if ƒ is within the proportional limit. The elongation due to this impact load is


                                 e ⫽ e⬘ ⫹ e⬘   冪1 ⫹ 2he⬘                          (5.262)

These equations indicate that the stress and deformation due to an energy load may
be considerably larger than those produced by the same weight applied gradually.
    The same equations hold for a beam with constant cross section struck by a
weight at midspan, except that ƒ and ƒ⬘ represent stresses at midspan and e and e⬘,
midspan deflections.
    According to Eqs. (5.261) and (5.262), a sudden load (h ⫽ 0) causes twice the
stress and twice the deflection as the same load applied gradually.

Impact on Long Members. For very long members, the effect of wave propaga-
tion should be taken into account. Impact is not transmitted instantly to all parts of
the struck body. At first, remote parts remain undisturbed, while particles struck
accelerate rapidly to the velocity of the colliding body. The deformations produced
5.150                                SECTION FIVE


move through the struck body in the form of elastic waves. The waves travel with
a constant velocity, ft / s,


                                                冪␳
                                                   E
                                     c ⫽ 68.1                                    (5.263)

where E ⫽ modulus of elasticity, psi
      p ⫽ density of the struck body, lb / ft3
   If an impact imparts a velocity v, ft / s, to the particles at one end of a prismatic
bar, the stress, psi, at that end is
                             v
                      ƒ⫽E        ⫽ 0.0147v 兹Ep ⫽ 0.000216pcv                     (5.264)
                             c
if ƒ is in the elastic range. In a compression wave, the velocity of the particles is
in the direction of the wave. In a tension wave, the velocity of the particles is in
the direction opposite the wave.
    In the plastic range, Eqs. (6.263) and (5.264) hold, but with E as the tangent
modulus of elasticity. Hence, c is not a constant and the shape of the stress wave
changes as it moves. The elastic portion of the stress wave moves faster than the
wave in the plastic range. Where they overlap, the stress and irrecoverable strain
are constant.
    (The impact theory is based on an assumption difficult to realize in practice—
that contact takes place simultaneously over the entire end of the bar.)
    At the free end of a bar, a compressive stress wave is reflected as an equal
tension wave, and a tension wave as an equal compression wave. The velocity of
the particles there equals 2v.
    At a fixed end of a bar, a stress wave is reflected unchanged. The velocity of
the particles there is zero, but the stress is doubled, because of the superposition
of the two equal stresses on reflection.
    For a bar with a fixed end struck at the other end by a moving mass weighing
Wm lb, the initial compressive stress, psi, is
                                  ƒo ⫽ 0.0147vo 兹Ep                              (5.265)
where vo is the initial velocity of the particles, ft / s, at the impacted end of the bar
and E and p, the modulus of elasticity, psi, and density, lb / ft3, of the bar. As the
velocity of Wm decreases, so does the pressure on the bar. Hence, decreasing com-
pressive stresses follow the wave front. At any time t ⬍ 2L / c, where L is the length
of the bar, in, the stress at the struck end is
                                     ƒ ⫽ ƒoe ⫺2␣t / ␶                            (5.266)
where e ⫽ 2.71828, ␣ is the ratio of Wb, the weight of the bar, to Wm, and ␶ ⫽
2L / c.
    When t ⫽ ␶, the wave front with stress ƒo arrives back at the struck end, assumed
still to be in contact with the mass. Since the velocity of the mass cannot change
suddenly, the wave will be reflected as from a fixed end. During the second interval,
␶ ⬍ t ⬍ 2␶, the compressive stress is the sum of two waves moving away from the
struck end and one moving toward this end.
    Maximum stress from impact occurs at the fixed end. For ␣ greater than 0.2,
this stress is
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.151


                                 ƒ ⫽ 2 ƒo(1 ⫹ e ⫺2␣)                           (5.267)
For smaller values of ␣, it is given approximately by


                                         冉 冪冊
                                 ƒ ⫽ ƒo 1 ⫹
                                                  1
                                                  ␣
                                                                               (5.268)

   Duration of impact, time it takes for the impact stress at the struck end to drop
to zero, is approximately
                                             ␲L
                                       T⫽                                      (5.269)
                                            c兹␣
for small values of ␣.
    When Wm is the weight of a falling body, velocity at impact is 兹2gh, when it
falls a distance h, in. Substitution in Eq. (5.265) yields ƒo ⫽ 兹2EhWb / AL, since
Wb ⫽ pAL is the weight of the bar. Putting Wb ⫽ ␣Wm; Wm / A ⫽ ƒ⬘, the stress
produced by Wm when applied gradually, and E ⫽ ƒ⬘L / e⬘, where e⬘ is the elongation
for the static load, gives ƒo ⫽ ƒ⬘ 兹2h␣ / e ⬘ . Then, for values of ␣ smaller than 0.2,
the maximum stress, from Eq. (5.268), is


                              ƒ ⫽ ƒ⬘   冉冪 2h␣
                                           e⬘
                                              ⫹   冪 e⬘ 冊
                                                      2h
                                                                               (5.270)

For larger values of ␣, the stress wave due to gravity acting on Wm during impact
should be added to Eq. (5.267). Thus, for ␣ larger than 0.2,


                                                冪 e⬘
                                                  2h␣
                    ƒ ⫽ 2 ƒ⬘(1 ⫺ e ⫺2␣) ⫹ 2 ƒ              (1 ⫹ e⫺2␣)          (5.271)

   Equations (5.270) and (5.271) correspond to Eq. (5.261), which was developed
without wave effects being taken into account. For a sudden load, h ⫽ 0, Eq. (5.271)
gives for the maximum stress 2 ƒ⬘(1 ⫺ e ⫺2␣ ), not quite double the static stress, the
result indicated by Eq. (5.261). (See also Art. 5.18.4.)
   (S. Timoshenko and J. N. Goodier, ‘‘Theory of Elasticity,’’ McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York; S. Timoshenko and D. H. Young, ‘‘Engineering Mechanics,’’
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.)


5.18.4   Dynamic Analysis of Simple Structures

Articles 5.181 to 5.18.3 present a theoretic basis for analysis of structures under
dynamic loads. As noted in Art. 5.18.2, an approximate solution based on an ide-
alized representation of an actual member of structure is advisable for dynamic
analysis and design. Generally, the actual structure may be conveniently represented
by a system of masses and massless springs, with additional resistances to account
for damping. In simple cases, the masses may be set equal to the actual masses;
otherwise, equivalent masses may be substituted for the actual masses (Art. 5.18.6).
The spring constants are the ratios of forces to deflections (see Art. 5.18.2).
    Usually, for structural purposes the data sought are the maximum stresses in the
springs and their maximum displacements and the time of occurrence of the max-
5.152                               SECTION FIVE


imums. This time is generally computed in terms of the natural period of vibration
of the member or structure, or in terms of the duration of the load. Maximum
displacement may be calculated in terms of the deflection that would result if the
load were applied gradually.
   The term D by which the static deflection e⬘, spring forces, and stresses are
multiplied to obtain the dynamic effects is called the dynamic load factor. Thus,
the dynamic displacement is
                                      y ⫽ De⬘                                 (5.272)
And the maximum displacement ym is determined by the maximum dynamic load
factor Dm, which occurs at time tm.

One-Degree Systems. Consider the one-degree-of-freedom system in Fig. 5.110a.
It may represent a weightless beam with a mass weighing W lb applied at midspan
and subjected to a varying force Fo ƒ (t), or a rigid frame with a mass weighing W
lb at girder level and subjected to this force. The force is represented by an arbi-
trarily chosen constant force Fo times F (t), a function of time.
    If the system is not damped, the equation of motion in the elastic range is
                               W d 2y
                                      ⫹ ky ⫽ Fo ƒ(t)                          (5.273)
                               g dt 2
where k is the spring constant and g the acceleration due to gravity, 386 in / s2. The
solution consists of two parts. The first, called the complementary solution, is ob-
tained by setting ƒ(t) ⫽ 0. This solution is given by Eq. (5.237). To it must be
added the second part, the particular solution, which satisfies Eq. (5.273).
    The general solution of Eq. (5.273), arrived at by treating an element of the
force-time curve (Fig. 5.111b) as an impulse, is

             y ⫽ yo cos ␻t ⫹
                               vo
                               ␻
                                  sin ␻t ⫹ e⬘␻   冕 ƒ (␶) sin ␻ (t ⫺ ␶) d␶
                                                  0
                                                   t
                                                                              (5.274)

where y ⫽ displacement of mass from equilibrium position, in
     yo ⫽ initial displacement of mass (t ⫽ 0), in
     ␻ ⫽ 兹kg / W ⫽ natural circular frequency of free vibration




                       FIGURE 5.110 One-degree system acted
                       on by a force varying with time.
                                     STRUCTURAL THEORY                                       5.153


       k ⫽ spring constant ⫽ force producing unit deflection, lb / in
      vo ⫽ initial velocity of mass, in / s
      e⬘ ⫽ Fo / k ⫽ displacement under static load, in
A closed solution is possible if the integral can be evaluated.
    Assume, for example, the mass is subjected to a suddenly applied force Fo that
remains constant (Fig. 5.111a). If yo and vo are initially zero, the displacement y
of the mass at any time t can be obtained from the integral in Eq. (5.274) by setting
ƒ (␶) ⫽ 1:

                    y ⫽ e⬘␻    冕 sin ␻ (t ⫺ ␶) d␶ ⫽ e⬘(1 ⫺ cos ␻t)
                                0
                                 t
                                                                                         (5.275)

This equation indicates that the dynamic load factor D ⫽ 1 ⫺ cos ␻t. It has a
maximum value Dm ⫽ 2 when t ⫽ ␲ / ␻. Figure 5.111b shows the variation of
displacement with time.

Multidegree Systems. A multidegree lumped-mass system may be analyzed by
the modal method after the natural frequencies of the normal modes have been
determined (Art. 5.18.2). This method is restricted to linearly elastic systems in
which the forces applied to the masses have the same variation with time. For other
cases, numerical analysis must be used.
   In the modal method, each normal mode is treated as an independent one-degree
system. For each degree of the system, there is one normal mode. A natural fre-
quency and a characteristic shape are associated with each mode. In each mode,
the ratio of the displacements of any two masses is constant with time. These ratios
define the characteristic shape. The modal equation of motion for each mode is

                                                          冘 F␾
                                                           j
                                                 gƒ(t)          r   rn
                             d 2An                        r⫽1
                                   ⫹ ␻ n2 An ⫽                                           (5.276)
                                                    冘
                                                     j
                              dt 2
                                                          Wr␾ 2rn
                                                    r⫽1




      FIGURE 5.111 Harmonic motion. (a) Constant force applied to an undamped one-
      degree system, such as the one in Fig. 5.110a. (b) Displacements vary with time like
      a cosine curve.
5.154                                     SECTION FIVE


where An     ⫽   displacement in the nth mode of an arbitrarily selected mass
       ␻n    ⫽   natural frequency of the nth mode
  Fr ƒ (t)   ⫽   varying force applied to the rth mass
      Wr     ⫽   weight of the rth mass
         j   ⫽   number of masses in the system
      ␾rn    ⫽   ratio of the displacement in the nth mode of the rth mass to An
        g    ⫽   acceleration due to gravity
   We define the modal static deflection as

                                           冘 F␾
                                                     j
                                                g             r       rn
                                                    r⫽1
                                    A⬘ ⫽                                              (5.277)
                                         ␻ 冘W␾
                                      n               j
                                                2                      2
                                                n                 r    rn
                                                    r⫽1


Then, the response for each mode is given by
                                          An ⫽ Dn A⬘n                                 (5.278)
where Dn ⫽ dynamic load factor.
   Since Dn depends only on ␻n and the variation of force with time ƒ(t), solutions
for Dn obtained for one-degree systems also apply to multidegree systems. The total
deflection at any point is the sum of the displacements for each mode, 兺An␾rn, at
that point.

Beams. The response of beams to dynamic forces can be determined in a similar
way. The modal static deflection is defined by

                                           冕L

                                            0
                                                p(x)␾n(x) dx
                                  A⬘n ⫽
                                                    冕    L                            (5.279)
                                            w
                                          ␻ 2
                                            n                ␾ (x) dx
                                                              2
                                                              n
                                            g        0


where p (x)   ⫽   load distribution on the span [ p (x) ƒ (x) is the varying force]
     ␾n(x)    ⫽   characteristic shape of the nth mode (see Art. 5.18.2)
         L    ⫽   span length
         w    ⫽   uniformly distributed weight on the span
The response of the beam then is given by Eq. (5.278), and the dynamic deflection
is the sum of the modal components, 兺An␾n(x).

Nonlinear Responses. When the structure does not react linearly to loads, the
equations of motion can be solved by numerical analysis if resistance is a unique
function of displacement. Sometimes, the behavior of the structure can be repre-
sented by an idealized resistance-displacement diagram that makes possible a so-
lution in closed form. Figure 5.112a shows such a diagram.

Elastic-Plastic Responses. Resistance is assumed linear (R ⫽ ky) in Fig. 5.112a
until a maximum Rm is reached. After that, R remains equal to Rm for increases in
y substantially larger than the displacement ye at the elastic limit. Thus, some por-
tions of the structure deform into the plastic range. Figure 5.112a, therefore, may
be used for ductile structures only rarely subjected to severe dynamic loads. When
                                    STRUCTURAL THEORY                                          5.155




     FIGURE 5.112 Response in the plastic range of a one-degree system with resistance
     characteristics indicated in (a) and subjected to a constant force (b) is shown in (c).


this diagram can be used for designing such structures, more economical designs
can be produced than for structures limited to the elastic range, because of the high
energy-absorption capacity of structures in the plastic range.
   For a one-degree system, Eq. (5.273) can be used as the equation of motion for
the initial sloping part of the diagram (elastic range). For the second stage, ye ⬍
y ⬍ ym, where ym is the maximum displacement, the equation is
                                   W d 2y
                                          ⫹ Rm ⫽ Fo ƒ (t)                                 (5.280)
                                   g dt 2
For the unloading stage, y ⬍ ym, the equation is
5.156                                 SECTION FIVE


                         W d 2y
                                ⫹ Rm ⫺ k(ym ⫺ y) ⫽ Fo ƒ (t)                     (5.281)
                         g dt 2
   Suppose, for example, the one-degree undamped system in Fig. 5.109a behaves
in accordance with the bilinear resistance function of Fig. 5.112a and is subjected
to a suddenly applied constant load (Fig. 5.112b). With zero initial displacement
and velocity, the response in the first stage ( y ⬍ ye), according to Eq. (5.281), is
                                 y ⫽ e⬘(1 ⫺ cos ␻t1)                            (5.282)
                                   dy
                                      ⫽ e⬘␻ sin ␻t1                             (5.283)
                                   dt
Equation (5.275) also indicates that displacement ye will be reached at a time te
such that cos ␻te ⫽ 1 ⫺ ye / e⬘.
   For convenience, let t2 ⫽ t ⫺ te be the time in the second stage; thus, t2 ⫽ 0 at
the start of that stage. Since the condition of the system at that time is the same as
at the end of the first stage, the initial displacement is ye and the initial velocity
e⬘␻ sin ␻te.
   The equation of motion of the second stage is
                                  W d 2y
                                         ⫹ Rm ⫽ Fo                              (5.284)
                                  g dt 2
The solution, taking into account initial conditions for ye ⬍ y ⬍ ym is
                           g
                     y⫽      (F ⫺ Rm)t 22 ⫹ e⬘␻t2 sin ␻te ⫹ ye                  (5.285)
                          2W o
Maximum displacement occurs at the time
                                         W␻e⬘
                               tm ⫽              sin ␻te                        (5.286)
                                      g(Rm ⫺ Ro)
and can be obtained by substituting tm in Eq. (5.285).
   The third stage, unloading after ym has been reached, can be determined from
Eq. (5.281) and conditions at the end of the second stage. The response, however,
is more easily found by noting that the third stage consists of an elastic, harmonic
residual vibration. In this stage the amplitude of vibration is (Rm ⫺ Fo) / k, since
this is the distance between the neutral position and maximum displacement, and
in the neutral position the spring force equals Fo. Hence, the response can be
obtained directly from Eq. (5.275) by substituting ym ⫺ (Rm ⫺ Fo) / k for e⬘, because
the neutral position, located at y ⫽ ym ⫺ (Rm ⫺ Fo) / k, occurs when ␻t3 ⫽ ␲ / 2,
where t3 ⫽ t ⫺ te ⫺ tm. The solution is
                                  Rm ⫺ Fo Rm ⫺ Fo
                       y ⫽ ym ⫺          ⫹        cos ␻t3                       (5.287)
                                     k       k
   Response in the three stages is shown in Fig. 5.112c. In that diagram, however,
to represent a typical case, the coordinates have been made nondimensional by
expressing y in terms of ye and the time in terms of T, the natural period of vibration.
   (J. M. Biggs, ‘‘Introduction to Structural Dynamics,’’ and R. Clough and J. Pen-
zien, ‘‘Dynamics of Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York; D. G.
Fertis and E. C. Zobel, ‘‘Transverse Vibration Theory,’’ The Ronald Press Company,
                                     STRUCTURAL THEORY                         5.157


New York; N. M. Newmark and E. Rosenblueth, ‘‘Fundamentals of Earthquake
Engineering,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.)


5.18.5    Resonance and Damping

Damping in structures, resulting from friction and other causes, resists motion im-
posed by dynamic loads. Generally, the effect is to decrease the amplitude and
lengthen the period of vibrations. If damping is large enough, vibration may be
eliminated.
    When maximum stress and displacement are the prime concern, damping may
not be of great significance for short-time loads. These maximums usually occur
under such loads at the first peak of response, and damping, unless unusually large,
has little effect in a short period of time. But under conditions close to resonance,
damping has considerable effect.
    Resonance is the condition of a vibrating system under a varying load such that
the amplitude of successive vibrations increases. Unless limited by damping or
changes in the condition of the system, amplitudes may become very large.
    Two forms of damping generally are assumed in structural analysis, viscous or
constant (Coulomb). For viscous damping, the damping force is taken proportional
to the velocity but opposite in direction. For Coulomb damping, the damping force
is assumed constant and opposed in direction to the velocity.

Viscous Damping. For a one-degree system (Arts. 5.18.2 to 5.18.4), the equation
of motion for a mass weighing W lb and subjected to a force F varying with time
but opposed by viscous damping is
                                 W d 2y              dy
                                        ⫹ ky ⫽ F ⫺ c                         (5.288)
                                 g dt 2              dt
where y   ⫽   displacement of the mass from equilibrium position, in
      k   ⫽   spring constant, lb / in
      t   ⫽   time, s
      c   ⫽   coefficient of viscous damping
      g   ⫽   acceleration due to gravity ⫽ 386 in / s2
   Let us set ␤ ⫽ cg / 2W and consider those cases in which ␤ ␻, the natural circular
frequency [Eq. (5.238)], to eliminate unusually high damping (overdamping). Then,
for initial displacement yo and velocity vo, the solution of Eq. (5.288) with F ⫽ 0
is

                     y ⫽ e ⫺␤t   冉vo ⫹ ␤yo
                                     ␻d                         冊
                                           sin ␻d t ⫹ yo cos ␻d t            (5.289)

where ␻d ⫽ 兹␻ 2 ⫺ ␤2 and e ⫽ 2.71828. Equation (5.289) represents a decaying
harmonic motion with ␤ controlling the rate of decay and ␻d the natural frequency
of the damped system.
   When ␤ ⫽ ␻
                             y ⫽ e ⫺␻t[vo t ⫹ (1 ⫹ ␻t)yo]                    (5.290)
which indicates that the motion is not vibratory. Damping producing this condition
is called critical, and, from the definition of ␤, the critical coefficient is
5.158                               SECTION FIVE




                            cd ⫽
                                   2W␤ 2W␻
                                    g
                                      ⫽
                                        g
                                           ⫽2                冪kWg                         (5.291)

Damping sometimes is expressed as a percent of critical ( ␤ as a percent of ␻).
   For small amounts of viscous damping, the damped natural frequency is ap-
proximately equal to the undamped natural frequency minus 1⁄2␤2 / ␻. For example,
for 10% critical damping ( ␤ ⫽ 0.1␻), ␻d ⫽ ␻[1 ⫺ 1⁄2(0.1)2] ⫽ 0.995␻. Hence, the
decrease in natural frequency due to small amounts of damping generally can be
ignored.
   Damping sometimes is measured by logarithmic decrement, the logarithm of
the ratio of two consecutive peak amplitudes during free vibration.
                                                               2␲␤
                           Logarithmic decrement ⫽                                        (5.292)
                                                                ␻
For example, for 10% critical damping, the logarithmic decrement equals 0.2␲.
Hence, the ratio of a peak to the following peak amplitude is e 0.2␲ ⫽ 1.87.
   The complete solution of Eq. (5.288) with initial displacement yo and velocity
vo is

y ⫽ e ⫺␤t   冉
            vo ⫹ ␤yo
               ␻d
                     sin ␻d t ⫹ yo cos ␻d t    冊
                                   ⫹ e⬘
                                          ␻2
                                          ␻d
                                               冕 ƒ (␶)e
                                                   t

                                                   0
                                                            ⫺␤(t⫺␶)
                                                                      sin ␻d (t ⫺ ␶) d␶   (5.293)

where e ⬘ is the deflection that the applied force would produce under static loading.
Equation (5.293) is identical to Eq. (5.274) when ␤ ⫽ 0.
   Unbalanced rotating parts of machines produce pulsating forces that may be
represented by functions of the form Fo sin ␣t. If such a force is applied to an
undamped one-degree system. Eq. (5.274) indicates that if the system starts at rest
the response will be

                    y⫽
                         Fog
                             冉
                             1/␻2
                         W 1 ⫺ ␣2 / ␻ 2    冊冉          sin ␣t ⫺
                                                                  ␣
                                                                  ␻
                                                                    sin ␻t  冊             (5.294)

And since the static deflection would be Fo / k ⫽ Fog / W␻ 2, the dynamic load factor
is

                        D⫽
                                 1
                             1 ⫺ ␣2 / ␻ 2 冉       ␣
                                          sin ␣t ⫺ sin ␻t
                                                  ␻                     冊                 (5.295)

If ␣ is small relative to ␻, maximum D is nearly unity; thus, the system is practically
statically loaded. If ␣ is very large compared with ␻, D is very small; thus, the
mass cannot follow the rapid fluctuations in load and remains practically stationary.
Therefore, when ␣ differs appreciably from ␻, the effects of unbalanced rotating
parts are not too serious. But if ␣ ⫽ ␻, resonance occurs; D increases with time.
Hence, to prevent structural damage, measures must be taken to correct the unbal-
anced parts to change ␣, or to change the natural frequency of the vibrating mass,
or damping must be provided.
    The response as given by Eq. (5.294) consists of two parts, the free vibration
and the forced part. When damping is present, the free vibration is of the form of
                                   STRUCTURAL THEORY                             5.159


Eq. (5.289) and is rapidly damped out. Hence, the free part is called the transient
response, and the forced part, the steady-state response. The maximum value of
the dynamic load factor for the steady-state response Dm is called the dynamic
magnification factor. It is given by
                                                      1
                        Dm ⫽                                                   (5.296)
                               兹(1 ⫺ ␣2 / ␻ 2)2 ⫹ (2␤␣ / ␻ 2)2

With damping, then, the peak values of Dm occur when ␣ ⫽ ␻ 兹1 ⫺ ␤2 / ␻ 2 and
are approximately equal to ␻ / 2␤. For example, for 10% critical damping.
                                                   ␻
                                       Dm ⫽            ⫽5
                                                  0.2␻
So even small amounts of damping significantly limit the response at resonance.

Coulomb Damping. For a one-degree system with Coulomb damping, the equa-
tion of motion for free vibration is
                                   W d 2y
                                          ⫹ ky ⫽ Fƒ                           (5.297)
                                   g dt 2
where Fƒ is the constant friction force and the positive sign applies when the ve-
locity is negative. If initial displacement is yo and initial velocity is zero, the re-
sponse in the first half cycle, with negative velocity, is

                              y⫽   冉   yo ⫺
                                              Fƒ
                                              k   冊
                                                 cos ␻ t ⫹
                                                           Fƒ
                                                           k
                                                                               (5.298)

equivalent to a system with a suddenly applied constant force. For the second half
cycle, with positive velocity, the response is

                          冉
                     y ⫽ ⫺yo ⫹ 3
                                         Fƒ
                                         k    冊
                                            cos ␻         冉 冊
                                                          t⫺
                                                               ␲
                                                               ␻
                                                                 ⫺
                                                                   Fƒ
                                                                   k
                                                                               (5.299)

If the solution is continued with the sign of Fƒ changing in each half cycle, the
results will indicate that the amplitude of positive peaks is given by yo ⫺ 4nFƒ / k,
where n is the number of complete cycles, and the response will be completely
damped out when t ⫽ kyo T / 4 Fƒ , where T is the natural period of vibration, or
2␲ / ␻.
    Analysis of the steady-state response with Coulomb damping is complicated by
the possibility of frequent cessation of motion.
    (S. Timoshenko, D. H. Young, and W. Weaver, ‘‘Vibration Problems in Engi-
neering,’’ 4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York; D. D. Barkan, ‘‘Dynamics
of Bases and Foundations,’’ McGraw-Hill Book Company; W. C. Hurty and M. F.
Rubinstein, ‘‘Dynamics of Structures,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.)


5.18.6   Approximate Design for Dynamic Loading

Complex analysis and design methods seldom are justified for structures subject to
dynamic loading because of lack of sufficient information on loading, damping,
5.160                                SECTION FIVE


resistance to deformation, and other factors. In general, it is advisable to represent
the actual structure and loading by idealized systems that permit a solution in closed
form (see Arts. 5.18.1 to 5.18.5).
    Whenever possible, represent the actual structure by a one-degree system con-
sisting of an equivalent mass with massless spring. For structures with distributed
mass. simplify the analysis in the elastic range by computing the response only for
one or a few of the normal modes. In the plastic range, treat each stage—elastic,
and plastic—as completely independent; for example, a fixed-end beam may be
treated, when in the elastic-plastic stage, as a simply supported beam.
    Choose the parameters of the equivalent system to make the deflection at a
critical point, such as the location of the concentrated mass, the same as it would
be in the actual structure. Stresses in the actual structure should be computed from
the deflections in the equivalent system.
    Compute an assumed shape factor ␾ for the system from the shape taken by the
actual structure under static application of the loads. For example, for a simple
beam in the elastic range with concentrated load at midspan, ␾ may be chosen, for
x ⬍ L / 2, as (Cx / L3)(3L2 ⫺ 4x 2), the shape under static loading, and C may be set
equal to 1 to make ␾ equal to 1 when x ⫽ L / 2. For plastic conditions (hinge at
midspan), ␾ may be taken as Cx / L, and C set equal to 2, to make ␾ ⫽ 1 when
x ⫽ L / 2.
    For a structure with concentrated forces, let Wr be the weight of the rth mass,
␾r the value of ␾ for a specific mode at the location of that mass, and Fr the
dynamic force acting on Wr. Then, the equivalent weight of the idealized system
is

                                           冘 W␾
                                            j
                                   We ⫽           r
                                                      2
                                                      r                         (5.300)
                                           r⫽1


where j is the number of masses. The equivalent force is

                                           冘 F␾
                                            j
                                    Fe ⫽          r   r                         (5.301)
                                           r⫽1


For a structure with continuous mass, the equivalent weight is

                                   We ⫽    冕 w␾   2
                                                      dx                        (5.302)

where w is the weight in lb / lin ft. The equivalent force is

                                           冕
                                    Fe ⫽ q␾ dx                                  (5.303)

for a distributed load q, lb / lin ft.
    The resistance of a member or structure is the internal force tending to restore
it to its unloaded static position. For most structures, a bilinear resistance function,
with slope k up to the elastic limit and zero slope in the plastic range (Fig. 5.112a),
may be assumed. For a given distribution of dynamic load, maximum resistance of
the idealized system may be taken as the total load with that distribution that the
structure can support statically. Similarly, stiffness is numerically equal to the total
load with the given distribution that would cause a unit deflection at the point where
the deflections in the actual structure and idealized system are equal. Hence, the
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.161


equivalent resistance and stiffness are in the same ratio to the actual as the equiv-
alent forces to the actual forces.
   Let k be the actual spring constant, g acceleration due to gravity, 386 in / s2, and
                                            We
                                    W⬘ ⫽       兺F                              (5.304)
                                            Fe
where 兺 F represents the actual total load. Then, the equation of motion of an
equivalent one-degree system is
                                 d 2y            兺F
                                      ⫹ ␻ 2y ⫽ g                               (5.305)
                                 dt 2            W⬘
and the natural circular frequency is


                                      ␻⫽     冪Wkg⬘                             (5.306)

The natural period of vibration equals 2␲ / ␻. Equations (5.305) and (5.306) have
the same form as Eqs. (5.236), (5.238), and (5.273). Consequently, the response
can be computed as indicated in Arts. 5.18.2 to 5.18.4.
   Whenever possible, select a load-time function for 兺F to permit use of a known
solution.
   For preliminary design of a one-degree system loaded into the plastic range by
a suddenly applied force that remains substantially constant up to the time of max-
imum response, the following approximation may be used for that response:
                                              ye
                                 ym ⫽                                          (5.307)
                                         2(1 ⫺ Fo / Rm)
where ye is the displacement at the elastic limit, Fo the average value of the force,
and Rm the maximum resistance of the system. This equation indicates that for
purely elastic response, Rm must be twice Fo; whereas, if ym is permitted to be large,
Rm may be made nearly equal to Fo, with greater economy of material.
   For preliminary design of a one-degree system subjected to a sudden load with
duration td less than 20% of the natural period of the system, the following ap-
proximation can be used for the maximum response:

                            ym ⫽
                                   1
                                     y
                                   2 e   冋冉 冊 册
                                            Fo
                                               ␻t
                                            Rm d
                                                     2

                                                         ⫹1                    (5.308)

where Fo is the maximum value of the load and ␻ the natural frequency. This
equation also indicates that the larger ym is permitted to be, the smaller Rm need
be.
    For a beam, the spring force of the equivalent system is not the actual force, or
reaction, at the supports. The real reactions should be determined from the dynamic
equilibrium of the complete beam. This calculation should include the inertia force,
with distribution identical with the assumed deflected shape of the beam. For ex-
ample, for a simply supported beam with uniform load, the dynamic reaction in
the elastic range is 0.39R ⫹ 0.11F, where R is the resistance, which varies with
time, and F ⫽ qL is the load. For a concentrated load F at midspan, the dynamic
reaction is 0.78R ⫺ 0.28F. And for concentrated loads F / 2 at each third point, it
5.162                              SECTION FIVE


is 0.62R ⫺ 0.12F. (Note that the sum of the coefficients equals 0.50, since the
dynamic-reaction equations must hold for static loading, when R ⫽ F.) These ex-
pressions also can be used for fixed-end beams without significant error. If high
accuracy is not required, they also can be used for the plastic range.


5.19     EARTHQUAKE LOADS

The seismic loads on the structure during an earthquake result from inertia forces
which were created by ground accelerations. The magnitude of these loads is a
function of the following factors: mass of the building, the dynamic properties of
the building, the intensity, duration, and frequency content of the ground motion,
and soil-structure interaction. In recent years, a lot of achievements have been made
to incorporate these influential factors into building codes accurately as well as
practically. The basis for IBC 2000 seismic provisions is the 1997 NEHRP ‘‘Rec-
ommended Provisions for the Development of Seismic Regulations for New Build-
ings and Other Structures’’ (FEMA 302). The National Earthquake Hazard Reduc-
tion Program (NEHRP) is managed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).
   In IBC 2000, the seismic loads are on a strength level limit state rather than on
a service load level, which was used in UBC 94 and prior versions. The seismic
limit state is based upon system performance, not member performance, and con-
siderable energy dissipation through repeated cycles of inelastic straining is as-
sumed.


5.19.1   Criteria Selection

In IBC 2000, the following basic information is required to determine the seismic
loads:
1. Seismic Use Group According to the nature of Building Occupancy, each struc-
   ture is assigned a Seismic Use Group (I, II, or III) and a corresponding Occu-
   pancy Importance (I) factor (I ⫽ 1.0, 1.25, or 1.5).
       Seismic Use Group I structures are those not assigned to either Seismic Use
   Group II or III. Seismic Use Group II are structures whose failure would result
   in a substantial public hazard due to occupancy or use. Seismic Use Group III
   is assigned to structures for which failure would result in loss of essential fa-
   cilities required for post-earthquake recovery and those containing substantial
   quantities of hazardous substances.
2. Site Class Based on the soil properties, the site of building is classified as A,
   B, C, D, E, or F to reflect the soil-structure interaction. Refer to IBC 2000 for
   Site Class definition.
3. Spectral Response Accelerations SS and S1 The spectral response seismic de-
   sign maps reflect seismic hazards on the basis of contours. They provide the
   maximum considered earthquake spectral response acceleration at short period
   SS and at 1-second period S1. They are for Site Class B, with 5% of critical
   damping. Refer to the maps in IBC 2000.
4. Basic Seismic-Force-Resisting System Different types of structural system have
   different energy-absorbing characteristics. The response modification coefficient
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.163


   R in Table 5.9 is used to account for these characteristics. Systems with higher
   ductility have higher R values.
With the above basic parameters available, the following design and analysis criteria
can be determined.

Seismic Design Category. The Seismic Design Category is based on the seismic
group and the design spectral response acceleration coefficients, SDS and SD1, which
will be explained later. The Seismic Design Category for a structure can be deter-
mined in accordance with Tables 5.10 and 5.11.
    Seismic Design Categories are used to determine the permissible structural sys-
tems, the limitations on height and irregularity of the structural components that
must be designed for seismic resistance and the types of lateral force analysis that
must be performed.
    Seismic Use Groups I and II structures located on sites with mapped maximum
considered earthquake spectral response acceleration at 1-second period S1, equal
to or greater than 0.75g, shall be assigned to Seismic Design Category E. Seismic
Use Group III structures located on such sites shall be assigned to Seismic Design
Category F. A structure assigned to Seismic Design Category E or F shall not be
sited where there is the potential for an active fault to cause rupture of the ground
surface at the structure.

Building Irregularity. Building with irregular shapes, changes in mass from floor
to floor, variable stiffness with height, and unusual setbacks do not perform well
during earthquakes. Thus, for each type of these irregularities, additional design
requirements shall be followed to maintain seismic-resisting capacity. IBC 2000
requires that all buildings be classified as regular or irregular based on the plan and
vertical configuration. See Tables 5.12 and 5.13 for classification and corresponding
requirements.

Design Requirements for Seismic Design Category A. Structures assigned to
Seismic Design Category A need only comply with the following:

• Structure shall be provided with a complete lateral-force-resisting system de-
  signed to resist the minimum lateral force, of 1% floor gravity load.
     The gravity load should include the total dead load and other loads listed
  below.
  • In areas used for storage, a minimum of 25% of the reduced floor live load
    (floor live load in public garages and open parking structures need not be in-
    cluded)
  • Where an allowance for partition load is included in the floor load design, the
    actual partition weight or a minimum weight of 10 psf of floor area (whichever
    is greater)
  • Total operating weight of permanent equipment
  • 20% of flat roof snow load where flat roof snow load exceeds 30 psf
• The direction of application of seismic forces used in design shall be that which
  will produce the most critical load effect in each component. The design seismic
  forces are permitted to be applied separately in each of two orthogonal directions
  and orthogonal effects are permitted to be neglected.
• The effect of this lateral force shall be taken as E in the load combinations.
  Special seismic load combinations that include Em need not to be considered.
 TABLE 5.9 Design Coefficients and Factors for Basic Seismic-Force-Resisting Systems

                                                                             System                       System limitations and building height limi-
                                                          Response             over-       Deflection       tations (ft) by seismic design category
                                                        modification         strength     amplification
         Basic seismic-force-resisting system           coefficient, R      factor, ⍀o     factor, Cd     A and B       C        D        E        F
                                                                   Bearing wall systems
 Ordinary steel braced frames                               4                 2              31⁄2           NL        NL       160      160      160
 Special reinforced concrete shear walls                    51⁄2              21⁄2           5              NL        NL       160      160      100
 Ordinary reinforced concrete shear walls                   41⁄2              21⁄2           4              NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
 Detailed plain concrete shear walls                        21⁄2              21⁄2           4              NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
 Ordinary plain concrete shear walls                        11⁄2              21⁄2           11⁄2           NL        NP       NP       NP       NP
 Special reinforced masonry shear walls                     4                 21⁄2           31⁄2           NL        NL       160      160      100
 Intermediate reinforced masonry shear walls                31⁄2              21⁄2           3              NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
 Ordinary reinforced masonry shear walls                    2                 21⁄2           13⁄4           NL        160      NP       NP       NP

 Detailed plain masonry shear walls                         2                 21⁄2           13⁄4           NL        160      NP       NP       NP
 Ordinary plain masonry shear walls                         11⁄2              21⁄2           11⁄4           NL        NP       NP       NP       NP
 Light frame walls with shear panels, Wood Struc-           61⁄2              3              4              NL        NL       160      160      100
   tural Panels
 Light frame walls with shear panels—Gypsum Board           2                21⁄2            2              NL        NL        35      NP       NP
                                                                Building frame systems
 Steel eccentrically braced frames, nonmoment resist-       7                 2              4              NL        NL       160      160      100
   ing, connections at columns away from links
 Special steel concentrically braced frames                 6                 21⁄2           5              NL        NL       160      160      100
 Ordinary steel concentrically braced frames                5                 2              41⁄2           NL        NL       160      100      100
 Special reinforced concrete shear walls                    6                 21⁄2           5              NL        NL       160      160      100
5.164
 TABLE 5.9 Design Coefficients and Factors for Basic Seismic-Force-Resisting Systems (Continued )

                                                                             System                       System limitations and building height limi-
                                                          Response             over-       Deflection       tations (ft) by seismic design category
                                                        modification         strength     amplification
         Basic seismic-force-resisting system           coefficient, R      factor, ⍀o     factor, Cd     A and B       C        D        E        F
                                                                   Bearing wall systems
 Ordinary reinforced concrete shear walls                   5                 21⁄2           41⁄2           NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
 Detailed plain concrete shear walls                        3                 21⁄2           21⁄2           NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
 Ordinary plain concrete shear walls                        2                 21⁄2           2              NL        NP       NP       NP       NP
 Composite eccentrically braced frames                      8                 2              4              NL        NL       160      160      100
 Composite concentrically braced frames                     5                 2              41⁄2           NL        NL       160      160      100
 Ordinary composite braced frames                           3                 2              3              NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
 Composite steel plate shear walls                          61⁄2              21⁄2           51⁄2           NL        NL       160      160      100
 Special composite reinforced concrete shear walls          6                 21⁄2           5              NL        NL       160      160      100
    with steel elements
 Ordinary composite reinforced concrete shear walls         5                 21⁄2           41⁄2           NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
    with steel elements
 Special reinforced masonry shear walls                     5                 21⁄2           4              NL        NL       160      160      100
 Intermediate reinforced masonry shear walls                41⁄2              21⁄2           4              NL        NL       160      160      100
 Ordinary reinforced masonry shear walls                    21⁄2              21⁄2           21⁄4           NL        160      NP       NP       NP
 Detailed plain masonry shear walls                         21⁄2              21⁄2           21⁄4           NL        160      NP       NP       NP
 Ordinary plain masonry shear walls                         11⁄2              21⁄2           11⁄4           NL        NP       NP       NP       NP
 Light frame walls with shear panels                        7                 21⁄2           41⁄2           NL        NL       160      160      160
5.165
TABLE 5.9 Design Coefficients and Factors for Basic Seismic-Force-Resisting Systems (Continued )

                                                                          System                        System limitations and building height limi-
                                                          Response          over-        Deflection       tations (ft) by seismic design category
                                                        modification      strength      amplification
        Basic seismic-force-resisting system            coefficient, R   factor, ⍀o      factor, Cd     A and B       C        D        E        F
                                                          Moment resisting frame systems
Special steel moment frames                                 8               3              51⁄2           NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Special steel truss moment frames                           7               3              51⁄2           NL        NL       160      100      NP
Intermediate steel moment frames                            6               3              5              NL        NL       160      100      NP
Ordinary steel moment frames                                4               3              31⁄2           NL        NL        35      NP       NP
Special reinforced concrete moment frames                   8               3              51⁄2           NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Intermediate reinforced concrete moment frames              5               3              41⁄2           NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
Ordinary reinforced concrete moment frames                  3               3              21⁄2           NL        NP       NP       NP       NP
Special composite moment frames                             8               3              51⁄2           NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Intermediate composite moment frames                        5               3              41⁄2           NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
Composite partially restrained moment frames                6               3              51⁄2           160       160      100      NP       NP
Ordinary composite moment frames                            3               3              4              NL        NP       NP       NP       NP
                                                              1
Masonry wall frames                                         5 ⁄2            3              5              NL        NL       160      160      100
                                                      Dual systems with special moment frames
Steel eccentrically braced frames, moment-resisting         8               21⁄2           4              NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
  connections, at columns away from links
Steel eccentrically braced frames, nonmoment-               7               21⁄2           4              NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
  resisting connections, at columns away from links
Special steel concentrically braced frames                  8               21⁄2           61⁄2           NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Ordinary steel concentrically braced frames                 6               21⁄2           5              NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Special reinforced concrete shear walls                     8               21⁄2           61⁄2           NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
5.166
TABLE 5.9 Design Coefficients and Factors for Basic Seismic-Force-Resisting Systems (Continued )

                                                                            System                       System limitations and building height limi-
                                                            Response          over-       Deflection       tations (ft) by seismic design category
                                                          modification      strength     amplification
        Basic seismic-force-resisting system              coefficient, R   factor, ⍀o     factor, Cd     A and B       C        D        E        F
Ordinary reinforced concrete shear walls                      7              21⁄2            6             NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
Composite eccentrically braced frames                         8              21⁄2            4             NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Composite concentrically braced frames                        6              21⁄2            5             NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Composite steel plate shear walls                             8              3               61⁄2          NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Special composite reinforced concrete shear walls             8              3               61⁄2          NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
   with steel elements
Ordinary composite reinforced concrete shjear walls           7              3               61⁄2          NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
   with steel elements
Special reinforced masonry shear walls                         7              3               61⁄2         NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
                                                                 1
Intermediate reinforced masonry shear walls                    6 ⁄2           3               51⁄2         NL        NL       NL       NP       NP
                                                      Dual systems with intermediate moment frames
Special steel concentrically braced frames                    6              21⁄2            5             NL        NL       160      100      NP
Ordinary steel concentrically braced frames                   5              21⁄2            41⁄2          NL        NL       160      100      NP
Special reinforced concrete shear walls                       6              21⁄2            5             NL        NL       160      100      100
Ordinary reinforced concrete shear walls                      51⁄2           21⁄2            41⁄2          NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
Ordinary reinforced masonry shear walls                       3              3               21⁄2          NL        160      NP       NP       NP
Intermediate reinforced masonry shear walls                   5              3               41⁄2          NL        NL       160      NP       NP
Composite concentrically braced frames                        5              21⁄2            41⁄2          NL        NL       160      100      NP
Ordinary composite braced frames                              4              21⁄2            3             NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
Ordinary composite reinforced concrete shear walls            5              3               41⁄2          NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
   with steel elements
5.167
TABLE 5.9 Design Coefficients and Factors for Basic Seismic-Force-Resisting Systems (Continued )

                                                                           System                         System limitations and building height limi-
                                                           Response          over-         Deflection       tations (ft) by seismic design category
                                                         modification      strength       amplification
              Basic seismic-force-resisting system       coefficient, R   factor, ⍀o       factor, Cd     A and B       C        D        E        F
                                                     Dual systems with intermediate moment frames
Shear Wall-Frame Interactive System with Ordinary            51⁄2           21⁄2             5              NL        NP       NP       NP       NP
  Reinforced Concrete Moment Frames and Ordi-
  nary Reinforced Concrete Shear Walls
                                                              Inverted pendulum systems
Special steel moment frames                                  21⁄2           2                21⁄2           NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Ordinary steel moment frames                                 11⁄4           2                21⁄2           NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
Special reinforced concrete moment frames                    21⁄2           2                11⁄4           NL        NL       NL       NL       NL
Structural Steel Systems Not Specifically Detailed           3              3                3              NL        NL       NP       NP       NP
  for Seismic Resistance
        NL indicates not limited.
        NP indicates not permitted.
5.168
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.169


TABLE 5.10 Seismic Design Category Based on Short Period Response Accelerations

                                                       Seismic Use Group
     Value of SDS                         I                    II                   III
         SDS ⬍ 0.167g                    A                     A                    A
 0.167g ⱕ SDS ⬍ 0.33g                    B                     B                    C
  0.33g ⱕ SDS ⬍ 0.50g                    C                     C                    D
          0.50g ⱕ SDS                    D                     D                    D



TABLE 5.11 Seismic Design Category Based on 1 Second Period Response Acceleration

                                                       Seismic Use Group
     Value of SDI                         I                    II                   III
         SDI ⬍ 0.067g                    A                     A                    A
0.067g ⱕ SDI ⬍ 0.133g                    B                     B                    C
 0.133g ⱕ SDI ⬍ 0.20g                    C                     C                    D
          0.20g ⱕ SDI                    D                     D                    D



  Where Em equals the earthquake force where seismic forces and dead loads coun-
  teract.
• All parts of the structure between separation joints shall be interconnected, and
  the connections shall be capable of transmitting the seismic force induced in the
  connection by the parts being connected. Any smaller portion of the structure
  shall be tied to the remainder of the structure with 5% the weight of the smaller
  portion. A positive connection for resisting horizontal forces acting on the mem-
  ber shall be provided for each beam, girder, or truss to its support. The connection
  shall have strength sufficient to resist 5% of the dead and live load vertical re-
  action applied horizontally.

Analysis Procedures for Seismic Design Categories B, C, D, E, and F. For Seis-
mic Design Categories B and C, IBC 2000 proposed equivalent lateral-load force
procedure shall be used. A more rigorous analysis is permitted, too. However, for
Seismic Design Categories D, E, and F, the analysis procedures are identified in
Table 5.14.


5.19.2   Design Spectral Response Accelerations

Ground motion accelerations, represented by response spectra and coefficients de-
rived from these spectra, shall be determined in accordance with the general pro-
cedure or the site-specific procedure. The later procedure shall be used for structures
on sites classified as Site Class F.

General Procedure for Determining Maximum Considered Earthquake and De-
sign Spectral Response Accelerations. The maximum considered earthquake
spectral response accelerations maps only provide values for Site Class B at short
5.170                                 SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.12 Plan Structural Irregularities

                                                                     Seismic Design
                                                                        Category
Irregularities            Irregularity type and description            application
1a                    Torsional irregularity—to be considered    D, E, and F
                        when diaphragms are not flexible
                      Torsional irregularity shall be            C, D, E, and F
                        considered to exist when the
                        maximum story drift, computed
                        including accidental torsion, at one
                        end of the structure transverse to an
                        axis is more than 1.2 times the
                        average of the story drifts at the two
                        ends of the structure
1b                    Extreme torsional irregularity—to be       D
                        considered when diaphragms are not
                        flexible
                      Extreme torsional irregularity shall be    C and D
                        considered to exist when the              (this irregularity
                        maximum story drift, computed                not permitted in
                        including accidental torsion, at one         E or F)
                        end of the structure transverse to an
                        axis is more than 1.4 time the
                        average of the story drifts at the two
                        ends of the structure.
2                     Re-entrant corners                         D
                      Plan configurations of a structure and     E and F
                        its lateral force-resisting system
                        contain re-entrant corners, where
                        both projections of the structure
                        beyond a re-entrant corner are
                        greater than 15% of the plan
                        dimension of the structure in the
                        given direction.
3                     Diaphragm discontinuity                    D, E, and F
                      Diaphragm with abrupt discontinuities      D, E and F
                        or variations in stiffness, including
                        those having cutout or open areas
                        greater than 50% of the gross
                        enclosed diaphragm area, or changes
                        in effective diaphragm stiffness of
                        more than 50% from one story to
                        the next.
4                     Out-of-plane offsets                       B, C, and D
                      Discontinuities in a lateral force         E and F
                        resistance path, such as out-of-plane
                        offsets of the vertical elements.
                                   STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.171


TABLE 5.13 Vertical Structural Irregularities

                                                                        Seismic Design
                                                                           Category
Irregularities              Irregularity type and description             application
5                    Nonparallel systems                                C, D, E, and F
                     The vertical lateral force-resisting elements
                       are not parallel to or symmetric about the
                       major orthogonal axes of the lateral force-
                       resisting system.
1a                   Stiffness irregularity—soft story                  D, E, and F
                     A soft story is one in which the lateral stiff-
                        ness is less than 70% of that in the story
                        above or less than 80% of the average
                        stiffness of the three stories above.
1b                   Stiffness irregularity—extreme soft story          D
                     An extreme soft story is one in which the          This irregularity
                        lateral stiffness is less than 60% of that in     not permitted
                        the story above or less than 70% of the           in E or F
                        average stiffness of the three stories above.
2                    Weight (mass) irregularity                         D, E and F
                     Mass irregularity shall be considered to exist
                      where the effective mass of any story is
                      more than 150% of the effective mass of
                      an adjacent story. A roof is lighter than the
                      floor below need not be considered.
3                    Vertical geometric irregularity                    D, E, and F
                     Vertical geometric irregularity shall be
                       considered to exist where the horizontal
                       dimension of the laterl-force-resisting
                       system in any story is more than 130% of
                       that in an adjacent story.
4                    In-plane discontinuity in vertical–lateral-        B, C, D, E and
                        force-resisting elements                           F
                     An in-plane offset of the lateral-force-
                        resisting elements greater than the length
                        of those elements or a reduction in
                        stiffness of the resisting element in the
                        story below.
5                    Discontinuity in capacity-weak story               B, C, and D
                     A weak story is one in which the story             This irregularity
                       lateral strength is less than 80% of that in        not permitted
                       the story above. The story strength is the          in E or F
                       total strength of seismic-resisting elements
                       sharing the story shear for the direction
                       under consideration.
5.172                                     SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.14 Analysis Procedures for Seismic Design Categories D, E, and F

                                                                Minimum allowance analysis
               Structure description                            procedure for seismic design
1. Seismic Use Group—1 building of light framed               Simplified procedure
   construction 3 stories or less in height and of
   other construction, 2 stories or less in height.
2. Regular structures other than those in Item 1              Equivalent lateral force procedure
   above, up to 240 ft / in height.
3. Structures that have vertical irregularities of            Model analysis procedure
   type 1a, 1b, 2, or 3 in Table 5.13, or plan
   irregularities of type 1a or 1b of Table 5.12,
   and have a height exceeding 5 stories or 65 ft
   and structures exceeding 240 ft in height.
4. Other structures designated as having plan or              Equivalent lateral force procedure
   vertical irregularities                                      with dynamic characteristics
                                                                included in the analytical
                                                                model
5. Structures with all of the following                       Model analysis procedure. A site-
   characteristics:                                             specific response spectrum shall
                                                                be used but the design base
   • located in an area with SD1 of 0.2 or greater              shear shall not be less than that
   • located in an area assigned to Site Class E or             determined from simplified
    F                                                           procedure
   • with a natural period T of 0.7 seconds or
    greater, as determined in equivalent lateral
    force procedure




period (SS) and at 1-second period (S1) and they need to be adjusted for site class
effects, by site coefficient Fa and Fv. (See Tables 5.15 and 5.16.)
   The corresponding design spectral response accelerations at short periods and at
1 second are:

                                                  2
                                          SDS ⫽     FS                                   (5.309)
                                                  3 a a
                                                  2
                                          SD1 ⫽     F S                                  (5.310)
                                                  3 v 1

   The general design response spectrum curve is developed as Fig. 5.113, in which

                                                        SD1
                                          T0 ⫽ 0.2
                                                        SDS

                                                  SD1
                                          TS ⫽
                                                  SDS

and T is the fundamental period (in seconds) of the structure.
                                        STRUCTURAL THEORY                                           5.173


TABLE 5.15 Values of Site Coefficient Fa as a Function of Site Class and Mapped
Spectral Response Acceleration at Short Periods (SS)

                                 Mapped spectral response acceleration at short periods
Site class         SS ⱕ 0.25          SS ⫽ 0.50          SS ⫽ 0.75          SS ⫽ 1.00          SS ⱖ 1.25
    A                 0.8                0.8                0.8                0.8                 0.8
    B                 1.0                1.0                1.0                1.0                 1.0
    C                 1.2                1.2                1.1                1.0                 1.0
    D                 1.6                1.4                1.2                1.1                 1.0
                                                                                                    a
    E                 2.5                1.7                1.2                0.9
                            a                  a                  a                  a                   a
    F                Note               Note               Note               Note               Note
    a
      Site specific geotechnical investigation and dynamic site response analyses shall be performed to de-
termine appropriate values.
    Note: Use straight-line interpolation for intermediate values of mapped spectral acceleration at short
period, SS.



TABLE 5.16 Values of Site Coefficient Fv as a Function of Site Class and Mapped
Spectral Response Acceleration at 1-Second Periods (S1)

                                Mapped spectral response acceleration at 1-second period
Site class         S1 ⱕ 0.1            S1 ⫽ 0.2          S1 ⫽ 0.3            S1 ⫽ 0.4           S1 ⫽ 0.5
    A                 0.8                0.8                0.8                0.8                 0.8
    B                 1.0                1.0                1.0                1.0                 1.0
    C                 1.7                1.6                1.5                1.4                 1.3
    D                 2.4                2.0                1.8                1.6                 1.5
                                                                                                    a
    E                 3.5                3.2                2.8                2.4
                            a                  a
    F                Note               Note               Notea              Note   a
                                                                                                 Note    a


    a
      Site specific geotechnical investigation and dynamic site response analyses shall be performed to de-
termine appropriate values.
    Note: Use straight-line interpolation for intermediate values of mapped spectral acceleration at 1-
second period, S1.



Site Specific Procedures for Determining Design Spectral Response Accelerations

• A site specific study shall account for the regional seismicity and geology; the
  expected recurrence rates and maximum magnitudes of events on known faults
  and source zones; the location of the site with respect to these; near source effects,
  if any; and the characteristics of subsurface site conditions.
• The probabilistic maximum considered earthquake ground motion shall be taken
  as that motion represented by an acceleration response spectrum having a 2%
  probability of exceedance within a 50-year period. The probabilistic maximum
  considered earthquake spectral response acceleration at any period, SaM, shall be
  taken from the 2% probability of exceedance within a 50-year period spectrum
  (where SaM exceeds the deterministic limit shown in Fig. 5.114.)
5.174                             SECTION FIVE




                     FIGURE 5.113 Design Response Spectrum




                 FIGURE 5.114 Deterministic Limit on Maximum
                 Considered Earthquake Response Spectrum



• The maximum considered earthquake ground motion spectrum shall be taken as
 the lesser of the probabilistic maximum considered earthquake ground motion or
 the deterministic maximum considered earthquake ground motion spectrum S⬘,
 but shall not be taken as less than the deterministic limit ground motion as shown
 in Fig. 5.114. S⬘ is calculated as 150% of the median spectral response acceler-
 ations (SaM) at all periods resulting from a characteristic earthquake on any known
 active fault within the region.
    The site-specific design spectral response acceleration Sa at any period can be
 expressed as
                                           2
                                    Sa ⫽     S                              (5.311)
                                           3 aM
                               STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.175


• Sa shall be no less than 80% of the corresponding value as the general design
  response on Fig. 5.113.
• The design spectral response acceleration coefficients at short periods, SDS and
  the design spectral response acceleration at 1-second period, SD1, shall be taken
  the values Sa at periods of 0.2 second and 1.0 second, respectively.


5.19.3   Minimum Design Lateral Force and Related Effects

From Table 5.14, we know that there are several seismic force analysis procedures,
such as simplified procedure, equivalent lateral force procedure, model analysis
procedure. The reader should note that another method, the dynamic analysis pro-
cedure, is not presented here. Different Seismic Design Categories require different
analysis procedures. Among these analysis procedures, the equivalent lateral force
procedure is the most popular approach because of its easy calculation and clear
seismic design concepts. It can also be used as the preliminary design seismic force
for the Seismic Design Categories that require more rigorous analysis procedures.
In this handbook, we will only cover this analysis procedure.

Equivalent Lateral Force Procedure. In this analysis, a building is considered to
be fixed at the base. The seismic base shear, which is equivalent to the total hori-
zontal forces at the base generated by a seismic force in any direction, can be
expressed as
                                     V ⫽ CSW                                (5.312)
where CS is the response coefficient and W is the effective seismic weight of the
structure, including the total dead load and other loads listed below:
1. In areas used for storage, a minimum of 25% of the reduced floor live load
   (floor live load in public garages and open parking structures need not be in-
   cluded)
2. Where an allowance for partition load is included in the floor load design, the
   actual partition weight or a minimum weight of 10 psf of floor area (whichever
   is greater)
3. Total operating weight of permanent equipment
4. 20% of flat roof snow load where the flat roof snow load exceeds 30 psf
   The seismic response coefficient, CS, shall be determined in accordance with the
following formula:
                                           SDS

                                           冉冊
                                    CS ⫽                                    (5.313)
                                            R
                                            I
where SDS ⫽ the design spectral response acceleration at short period
       R ⫽ the response modification factor from Table 5.9
        I ⫽ the Occupancy Importance Factor
   The value of the seismic response coefficient CS need not exceed the following:
5.176                                  SECTION FIVE


                                               SDI

                                              冉冊
                                       CS ⫽                                   (5.314)
                                               R
                                                   T
                                               I

but shall not be taken less than:

                                      CS ⫽ 0.44SD1I                           (5.315)

   For buildings and structures in Seismic Design Categories E or F, and those
buildings and structures for which the 1-second spectral response S1 is equal to or
greater than 0.6g, the value of the seismic response coefficient CS shall not be taken
as less than:

                                               0.5S1
                                        CS ⫽                                  (5.316)
                                                R/I

where I and R are defined above and

SD1 ⫽ the design spectral response acceleration at 1-second period
  T ⫽ the fundamental period of the building (seconds)
 S1 ⫽ the maximum considered earthquake spectral response acceleration at 1-
      second period

   The fundamental period of the building, T in the direction under consideration
shall be established using the structural properties and deformational characteristics
of the resisting elements in a properly substantiated analysis, or shall be taken as
the approximate fundamental period Ta. The calculated fundamental period T shall
not exceed the product of the coefficient for the upper limit on the calculated period
Cu, from Table 5.17, and the approximate fundamental period Ta. The approximate
fundamental Ta shall be determined as:

                                       Ta ⫽ CT h3n / 4                        (5.317)




TABLE 5.17 Coefficient for Upper Limit on Calculated Period

Design spectral response acceleration at 1-second period, SD1            Coefficient Cu
                           ⱖ0.4                                               1.2
                            0.3                                               1.3
                            0.2                                               1.4
                            0.15                                              1.5
                           ⱕ0.1                                               1.7
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                              5.177


where CT ⫽ building period coefficient (see following list of coefficient values)

             • 0.035 for moment resisting frame systems of steel in which the
               frames resist 100% of the required seismic force and are not enclosed
               or adjoined by more rigid components that will prevent the frames
               from deflecting when subjected to seismic forces,
             • 0.030 for moments resisting frame systems of reinforced concrete in
               which the frames resist 100% of the required seismic force and are
               not enclosed or adjoined by more rigid components that will prevent
               the frames from deflecting when subjected to seismic forces,
             • 0.030 for eccentrically braced steel frames,
            • 0.020 for all other building systems.
       hn ⫽ the height (ft) above the base to the highest level of the building.

Alternately, determination of the approximate fundamental period Ta in seconds,
from the following formula for concrete and steel moment-resisting frame buildings
not exceeding 12 stories in height and having a minimum story height of 10 ft, is
permitted:

                                     Ta ⫽ 0.1N                               (5.318)

where N is the number of stories.
  The base shear V is distributed vertically to the n stories as lateral forces F:

                                    Fx ⫽ Cvx V                               (5.319)

                                            wx hxk
                                   Cvx ⫽                                     (5.320)
                                           冘 wh
                                            n
                                                   k
                                                 i i
                                           i⫽1



where Cvx ⫽ vertical distribution factor,
wi and wx ⫽ the portion of the total gravity load of the building, W, located or
             assigned to level i or x,
 hi and hx ⫽ the height (ft) from the base to level i or x, and
         k ⫽ a distribution exponent related to the building period as follows:

             • For buildings having a period of 0.5 seconds or less, k ⫽ 1
             • For buildings having a period of 2.5 seconds or more, k ⫽ 2
             • For buildings having a period between 0.5 and 2.5 seconds, k shall
              be 2 or shall be determined by linear interpolation between 1 and
              2.
   The seismic design story shear in any story, Vx is


                                           冘F
                                            n
                                    Vx ⫽         i                           (5.321)
                                           i⫽1
5.178                                SECTION FIVE


Rigid Diaphragms. For rigid diaphragms the seismic design story share, Vx shall
be distributed to the various vertical elements of the seismic force-resisting system
in the story under consideration based on the relative lateral stiffness of the vertical
force resisting elements and the diaphragm.
    For flexible diaphragms, seismic design story shear, Vx shall be distributed to
various vertical elements based on the tributary area of the diaphragm to each line
of resistance. For the purpose of this section, the vertical elements of the lateral
force-resisting system are permitted to be considered to be in the same line of
resistance, if the maximum out-of-plane offset between each of the elements is less
than 5% of the building dimension perpendicular to the direction of lateral load.

Torsion. Where diaphragms are not flexible, the design shall include the torsional
moment Mt, resulting from the difference in locations of the center of mass and the
center of stiffness. Also where diaphragms are not flexible, in addition to the tor-
sional moment, the design shall include accidental torsional moments Mta, caused
by assumed displacement of the center of mass, each way from its actual location,
by a distance equal to 5% of the dimension of the building perpendicular to the
direction of the applied forces.

Dynamic Amplification of Torsion. For a structure in Seismic Design Category
C, D, E, or F, where Type 1a or 1b plan torsional irregularity exists, effects of
torsional irregularity shall be accounted for by multiplying the sum of Mt plus Mta
at each level by a torsional amplification factor, Ax, determined from the following
formula:

                                   Ax ⫽   冉 冊  ␦max
                                              1.2␦avg
                                                        2

                                                                                (5.322)

where ␦max ⫽ the maximum displacement at level x and
      ␦avg ⫽ the average of the displacement at the extreme points of the structure
             at level x

The torsional amplification factor, Ax, is not required to exceed 3.0. The more severe
loading for each element shall be considered for design.

Overturning. The building shall be designed to resist overturning effects caused
by the seismic forces. At any story, the increment of overturning moment in the
story under consideration shall be distributed to the various vertical force-resisting
elements in the same proportion as the distribution of the horizontal shears to those
elements.
   The overturning moments at level x, Mx shall be determined from the following
formula:

                                          冘 F (h ⫺ h )
                                          n
                                Mx ⫽ ␶          i   i       x                   (5.323)
                                          i⫽x


where Fi ⫽ the portion of the seismic base shear V, induced at Level i,
hi and hx ⫽ the height from the base to level i or x,
        ␶ ⫽ the Overturning Moment Reduction Factor

The Overturning Moment Reduction Factors are
                                STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.179


• 1.0 for the top 10 stories,
• 0.8 for the 20th story from the top and below, and
• value between 1.0 and 0.8 determined by a straight line interpolation for stories
  between the 20th and 10th stories below the top.

Story Drift Determination. The design story drift ⌬ shall be computed as the
difference of the deflections at the center of mass at the top and bottom of the story
under consideration. Where allowable stress design is used. ⌬ shall be computed
using earthquake forces without dividing by 1.4. For structures assigned to Seismic
Design Category C, D, E, or F having plan irregularity types 1a or 1b of Table
5.12, the design story drift ⌬ shall be computed as the largest difference of the
deflections along any of the edges of the structure at the top and bottom of the
story under consideration.
   The deflections of level x, ␦x, shall be determined in accordance with following
formula:
                                            Cd␦xe
                                     ␦x ⫽                                     (5.324)
                                              I
where Cd ⫽ the deflection amplification factor in Table 5.9,
      ␦xe ⫽ the deflections determined by an elastic analysis of the seismic force
            resisting system, and
        I ⫽ the Occupancy Importance Factor
   For purposes of this drift analysis only, the upper bound limitation specified on
the computed fundamental period, T, in seconds, of the building, shall not apply.
   The design story drift ⌬ shall be increased by the incremental factor relating to
the P-delta effects. When calculating drift, the redundancy coefficient ␳ shall be
taken as 1.0.

P-Delta Effects. P-delta effects on story shears and moments the resulting mem-
ber forces and moments, and the story drifts induced by these effects are not re-
quired to be considered when the stability coefficient ␪, as determined by the fol-
lowing formula, is equal to or less than 0.10:
                                           Px ⌬
                                    ␪⫽                                        (5.325)
                                          Vx hsxCd
where Px ⫽ the total unfactored vertical design load at and above level x; when
            calculating the vertical design load for purposes of determining P-
            delta, the individual load factors need not exceed 1,0;
       ⌬ ⫽ the design story drift occurring simultaneously within Vx;
      Vx ⫽ the seismic shear force acting between level x and x ⫺ 1;
      hsx ⫽ the story height below level x; and
      Cd ⫽ the deflection amplification factor in Table 5.9
The stability coefficient ␪ shall not exceed ␪max determined as follows:
                                          0.5
                                 ␪max ⫽       ⱕ 0.25                          (5.326)
                                          ␤Cd
where ␤ is the ratio of shear demand to shear capacity for the story between level
x and x ⫺ 1. Where the ratio ␤ is not calculated, a value of ␤ ⫽ 1.0 shall be used.
5.180                                SECTION FIVE


   When the stability coefficient ␪ is greater than 0.10 but less than or equal to
␪max, interstory drifts and element forces shall be computed including P-delta ef-
fects. To obtain the story drift for including the P-delta effect, the design story drift
shall be multiplied by 1.0 / (1 ⫺ ␪). Where ␪ is greater than ␪max the structure is
potentially unstable and shall be redesigned.

Seismic Load Effect. Where the effects of gravity and seismic loads are additive,
seismic load E shall be defined as:

                                 E ⫽ ␳QE ⫹ 0.2SDS D                              (5.327)

and where the effects of gravity counteract the seismic load, seismic load E shall
be defined as

                                 E ⫽ ␳QE ⫺ 0.2SDS D                              (5.328)

where E ⫽ the combined effect of horizontal and vertical earthquake-induced
          forces,
      ␳ ⫽ a reliability factor based on system redundancy,
     QE ⫽ the effect of horizontal seismic forces,
    SDS ⫽ the design spectral response acceleration at short periods,
      D ⫽ the effect of dead load

   Where seismic forces and dead loads are additive,

                               Em ⫽ ⍀o QE ⫹ 0.2SDSD                              (5.329)

   Where seismic forces and dead loads counteract,

                               Em ⫽ ⍀o QE ⫺ 0.2SDSD                              (5.330)

    Where E, QE, SDS and D are as defined above and ⍀o is the system overstrength
factor as given in Table 5.9. The terms ⍀oQE need not exceed the maximum force
that can be transferred to the element by the other elements of the lateral force-
resisting system.
    Where allowable stress design methodologies are used with the special load
combinations with Em design strengths are permitted to be determined using an
allowable stress increase of 1.7 and a resistance factor ␾, of 1.0.

Redundancy. A redundancy coefficient, ␳, shall be assigned to all structures in
accordance with this section, based on the extent of structural redundancy inherent
in the lateral forces resisting system.
For structure assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C, the value of the
redundancy coefficient ␳ is 1.0. For structures in Seismic Design Categories D, E,
and F, the redundancy coefficient ␳ shall be taken as the largest of the values of ␳i,
calculated at each story i of the structure as follows:

                                                 20
                                  ␳i ⫽ 2 ⫺                                       (5.331)
                                             rmaxi 兹Ai
                                 STRUCTURAL THEORY                                5.181


where rmax ⫽ the ratio of the design shear resisted by the most heavily loaded single
             element in the story to the total story shear, for a given direction of
             loading

               • For braced frames the value of rmaxi is equal to the lateral force
                 component in the most heavily loaded braced element divided by
                 the story shear.
               • For moment frames, rmaxi shall be taken as the maximum of the
                 sum of the shears in any two adjacent columns in a moment frame
                 divided by the story shear. For columns common to two bays with
                 moment resisting connections on opposite sides at the level under
                 consideration, it is permitted to use 70% of the shear in that column
                 in the column shear summation.
               • For shear walls, rmaxi shall be taken as the maximum value of the
                 product of the shear in the wall or wall pier and 10 / lW, divided by
                 the story shear, where lW is the length of the wall or wall pier in
                 feet.
               • For dual systems, rmaxi shall be taken as the maximum value defined
                above, considering all lateral load-resisting elements in the story.
                The lateral loads shall be distributed to elements based on relative
                rigidities considering the interaction of the dual system. For dual
                systems, the value of ␳ need not exceed 80% of the value calculated
                above.
         Ai ⫽ the floor area in square feet of the diaphragm level immediately above
              the story.

The value of ␳ shall not be less than 1.0, and need not exceed 1.5.
   For structures with seismic force resisting systems in any direction comprised
solely of special moment frames, the seismic force-resisting system shall be con-
figured such that the value of ␳ calculated in accordance with this section does not
exceed 1.25 for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, and does not
exceed 1.1 for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category E or F.

Deflections and Drift Limits. The design story drift ⌬ shall not exceed the allow-
able story drift ⌬a, as obtained from Table 5.18 for any story. All portions of the
building shall be designed to act as an integral unit in resisting seismic forces unless
separated structurally by a distance sufficient to avoid damaging contact under total
deflection ␦x.



5.19.4   Design Detailing Requirements and Structural Component
         Load Effects

In order to provide a more reliable and consistent level of seismic safety in new
building construction, IBC 2000 includes a much larger set of provisions on pro-
portioning and detailing structural members and system. The Code requirements
are based on Seismic Design Category. These special requirements are for items
such as openings in shear walls and diaphragms, diaphragm design, collector ele-
ment design, design of bearing walls and shear walls and their anchorage, direction
5.182                                          SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.18 Allowable Story Drift, ⌬aa

                                                                                Seismic use group
                    Building                                      I                     II               III
Building, other than masonry shear wall or                   0.025 hsxb             0.020 hsx        0.015 hsx
  masonry wall frames buildings, four
  stories or less in height with interior
  walls, partitions, ceilings, and exterior
  wall systems that have been designed to
  accommodate the story drifts
Masonry cantilever shear wall buildingsc                     0.010    hsx           0.010    hsx     0.010     hxx
Other masonry shear wall buildings                           0.007    hxx           0.007    hsx     0.007     hsx
Masonry wall frame buildings                                 0.013    hsx           0.013    hsx     0.010     hsx
All other buildings                                          0.020    hsx           0.015    hsx     0.010     hsx
a
  There shall be no drift for single-story buildings with interior walls, partitions, ceilings, and exterior wall
systems that have been designed to accommodate the story drifts.
b
  hsx is the story height below Level x.
c
  Buildings in which the basic structural system consists of masonry shear walls designed as vertical elements
cantilevered from their base or foundation support which are so constructed that moment transfer between
shear walls coupling is negligible.



of seismic load impact, and so on. It is very important that the design engineer be
familiar with requirements.


5.19.5     Seismic Design Requirements on Nonstructural Components

Architectural, mechanical, electrical, and other nonstructural components in struc-
tures shall be designed and constructed to resist equivalent static forces and dis-
placements. Unless otherwise noted, components shall be considered to have the
same Seismic Design Category as the structure that they occupy or to which they
are attached.
   The interrelationship of components and their effect on each other shall be con-
sidered so that the failure of any essential or nonessential architectural, mechanical,
or electrical component shall not cause the failure of another essential architectural,
mechanical, or electrical component.

Component Force Transfer. The component shall be attached such that the com-
ponent forces are transferred to the structure of the building. Component seismic
attachments shall be bolted, welded, or otherwise positively fastened without con-
sideration of frictional resistance produced by the effects of gravity.
The Seismic Force Fp is

                                            0.4␣pSDS Wp
                                                             冉              z
                                                                                冊
                                                冉冊
                                    Fp ⫽                       1⫹2                                     (5.332)
                                                  Rp                        h
                                                  Ip

and
                               STRUCTURAL THEORY                               5.183


                          0.3SDS IpWp ⱕ Fp ⱕ 1.6SDS IpWp
where Fp ⫽ Seismic design force centered at the component’s center of gravity and
           distributed relative to component’s mass distribution
     SDS ⫽ Design spectral response acceleration at short period
      ␣p ⫽ Component amplification factor that varies from 1.00 to 2.50 (select
           appropriate value from Tables 5.19 and 5.20)
      Ip ⫽ Component importance factor that is 1.5 for life safety component and
           1.0 for all other components
     Wp ⫽ Component operating weight
      Rp ⫽ Component response modification factor that varies from 1.0 to 5.0
           (select appropriate value from Tables 5.19 and 5.20)
       z ⫽ Height in structure at point of attachment of component. For items at
           or below the base, z shall be taken as 0.
       h ⫽ Average roof height of structure relative to the base elevation.
   The force Fp shall be applied independently longitudinally and laterally in com-
bination with service loads associated with the component. Component earthquake
effects shall be determined for combined horizontal and vertical load effects as QE
in E. The redundancy based reliability coefficient, p, is permitted to be taken as
equal to 1.
   (J. M. Biggs, ‘‘Introduction to Structural Dynamics,’’ and R. Clough and J. Pen-
zien, ‘‘Dynamics of Structures,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York; E.
Rosenblueth, ‘‘Design of Earthquake-Resistant Structures,’’ Halsted / Wiley, Som-
erset, N.J.; N. M. Newmark and E. Rosenblueth, ‘‘Fundamentals of Earthquake
Engineering,’’ Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.; S. Okamoto, ‘‘Introduction to
Earthquake Engineering,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, International Build-
ing Code 2000)



5.20   FLOOR VIBRATIONS

Excessive vibration can be characterized as too large for sensitive equipment or too
large for occupant comfort. Determining these permissible levels is an entire re-
search area in itself; however, some of the more widely accepted levels are dis-
cussed in following paragraphs. These levels are expressed by researchers in terms
of either acceleration, velocity, or displacement amplitudes and are often frequency-
dependent. There is no consensus as to the most relevant measure for describing
acceptable levels.
   Comfort of the occupants is a function of human perception. This perception is
affected by factors including the task or activity of the perceiver, the remoteness
of the source, and the movement of other objects in the surroundings. A person is
distracted by acceleration levels as small as 0.5% g. Multiple-use occupancies must
therefore be carefully considered.
   Webster and Vaicitis describe a facility that has both dining and dancing in a
large open area. The floor was noted to have a first natural frequency of 2.4 Hz,
which is in resonance with the beat of many popular dance song. This resonance
response produced maximum acceleration and displacement levels of 7% g and
0.13 in, respectively. Such levels actually caused sloshing waves in drinks and
noticeable bouncing of the chandeliers. The occupants found these levels to be quite
objectionable.
5.184                                         SECTION FIVE


TABLE 5.19 Architectural Components Coefficients

                       Architectural component or element                                      ␣pa        Rp
Interior nonstructural walls and partitions
   Plain (unreinforced) masonry walls                                                         1.0       1.25
   Other walls and partitions                                                                 1.0       2.5
Cantilever elements (unbraced or braced to structural frame below its
   center of mass)
   Parapets and cantilever interior nonstructural walls                                       2.5       2.5
   Chimneys and stacks when laterally braced or supported by the                              2.5       2.5
     structural frame
Cantilever elements (braced to structural frame above its center of mass)
   Parapets                                                                                   1.0       2.5
   Chimneys and Stacks                                                                        1.0       2.5
   Exterior Nonstructural Walls                                                               1.0       2.5
Exterior nonstructural wall elements and connections
   Wall element                                                                               1.0       2.5
   Body of wall panel connections                                                             1.0       2.5
   Fasteners of the connecting system                                                         1.25      1.0
Veneer
   Limited deformity elements and attachments                                                 1.0       2.5
   Low deformity elements or attachments                                                      1.0       1.25
Penthouse (except when framed by an extension of the building frame)                          2.5       3.5
Ceilings                                                                                      1.0       2.5
Cabinets
   Storage cabinets and laboratory equipment                                                  1.0       2.5
Access floors
   Special access floors                                                                      1.0       2.5
   All other                                                                                  1.0       1.25
Appendages and ornamentations                                                                 2.5       2.5
Signs and billboards                                                                          2.5       2.5
Other rigid components
   High deformability elements and attachments                                                1.0       3.5
   Limited deformability elements and attachments                                             1.0       2.5
   Low deformability materials and attachments                                                1.0       1.25
Other flexible components
   High deformability elements and attachments                                                2.5       3.5
   Limited deformability elements and attachments                                             2.5       2.5
   Low deformability materials and attachments                                                2.5       1.25
a
 Where justified by detailed analyses, a lower value for ␣p is permitted, but shall not be less than 1. The
reduced value of ␣p shall be between 2.5, assigned to flexible or flexibly attached equipment, and 1, assigned
to rigid or rigidly attached equipment.



    Many different scales and criteria are available which address the subjective
evaluation of floor vibration. Factors included in these subjective evaluations in-
clude the natural frequency of the floor system, the maximum dynamic amplitude
(acceleration, velocity, or displacement) due to certain excitations, and the amount
of damping present in the floor system. At the present time, most of the design
criteria utilize either a single impact function to assess vibrations, which are tran-
                                         STRUCTURAL THEORY                                             5.185


TABLE 5.20 Mechanical and Electrical Components Coefficients

    Mechanical and electrical component or element                                ␣pa                     Rp
General mechanical
  Boilers and furnaces                                                            1.0                   2.5
  Pressure vessels on skirts and free-standing                                    2.5                   2.5
  Stacks                                                                          2.5                   2.5
  Cantilevered chimneys                                                           2.5                   2.5
  Other                                                                           1.0                   2.5
Manufacturing and process machinery
  General                                                                         1.0                   2.5
  Conveyors (nonpersonnel)                                                        2.5                   2.5
Piping systems
  High deformability elements and attachments                                     1.0                   3.5
  Limited deformability elements and attachments                                  1.0                   2.5
Low deformability elements or attachments                                         1.0                   1.25
HVAC system equipment
  Vibration isolated                                                              2.5                   2.5
  Nonvibration isolated                                                           1.0                   2.5
  Mounted in-line with ductwork                                                   1.0                   2.5
  Other                                                                           1.0                   2.5
Elevator components                                                               1.0                   2.5
  Escalator component                                                             1.0                   2.5
Trussed towers (free-standing or guyed)                                           2.5                   2.5
General electrical
  Distributed systems (bus ducts, conduit, cable tray)                            2.5                   5.0
  Equipment                                                                       1.0                   2.5
Lighting Fixtures                                                                 1.0                   1.25
a
 Where justified by detailed analyses, a lower value for ␣p is permitted, but shall not be less than 1. The
reduced value of ␣p shall be between 2.5, assigned to flexible or flexibly attached equipment, and 1, assigned
to rigid or rigidly attached equipment.



sient in nature, or a sinusoidal function to assess steady-state vibrations from rhyth-
mic activities.


5.21     WISS AND PARMELEE RATING FACTOR
         FOR TRANSIENT VIBRATIONS

Wiss and Parmelee also conducted research to refine the findings of Lenzen’s re-
search. In particular, they attempted to quantify, in a more scientifically rigorous
manner, human perception to transient floor motion. They subjected 40 persons,
standing on a vibrating platform, to transient vibration episodes with different com-
binations of frequency (2.5 to 25 Hz), peak displacements (0.0001 to 0.10 in), and
damping (0.1 to 0.16, expressed as a ratio of critical). After each episode, the
subject was asked to rate the vibration on a scale of 1 to 5 with the following
definitions: (1) imperceptible, (2) barely perceptible, (3) distinctly perceptible, (4)
strongly perceptible, and (5) severe. Using regression analysis, an equation was
5.186                               SECTION FIVE


developed which related the three variables of the vibration episode to the subjective
perception ratings. This equation is presented below.
   Wiss and Parmelee rating factor:

                               R ⫽ 5.08   冉 冊FA
                                            D 0.217
                                                      0.265




where R ⫽ response rating; 1 ⫽ imperceptible; 2 ⫽ barely perceptible; 3 ⫽ dis-
          tinctly perceptible; 4 ⫽ strongly perceptible; 5 ⫽ severe.
      F ⫽ frequency of the vibration episode, Hz
      A ⫽ maximum displacement amplitude, in
      D ⫽ damping ratio, expressed as a ratio of critical
   A graph of this subjective rating system is shown in Fig. 5.115. It should be
noted that the lines represent a mean for that particular rating. The authors suggest
that the boundaries for each rating lie halfway between the mean lines. The bound-
aries defining R ⫽ 1 and R ⫽ 5 are not identified by the authors. These ratings are
unbounded; therefore, a mean line cannot be computed.


5.22    REIHER-MEISTER SCALE FOR STEADY-
        STATE VIBRATIONS

The scale discussed below and those in Art. 5.21 and 5.23 useful in assessing human
perception to vibration levels. They are presented to provide insight with respect




             FIGURE 5.115 Wiss and Parmelee rating factor scale.17
                                      STRUCTURAL THEORY                                       5.187




           FIGURE 5.116 Modified Reiher-Meister and Reiher-Meister scales.


TABLE 5.21 Estimates of Floor System Damping

                               Damping
          Component          (% of critical)                       Description
Bare floor                        1–3%         Lower limit for thin slab of lightweight concrete;
                                                  upper limit for thick slab of normal weight
                                                  concrete
Ceiling                           1–3%         Lower limit for hung ceiling; upper limit for
                                                  sheetrock on furring attached to beams of
                                                  joists
Ductwork and mechanial           1–10%         Depends on amount and attachment
Partition                       10–20%         If attached to the floor system and not spaced
                                                  more than every five floor beams of the effec-
                                                  tive joist floor width
   (Serviceability Considerations for floors and roof systems Chapter 9, ‘‘Steel Design Handbook’’ by
Akbar Tamboli, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.)



to the vibration levels which annoy occupants as well as a historical perspective on
the development of floor vibration criteria. Reiher and Meister15 published a fre-
quently referenced scale concerning human perception to steady-state vibration.
While this scale was not derived specifically for the evaluation of floor systems, it
has been extrapolated by other researchers for such purposes. The scale represented
by the right-hand axis of the graph in Fig. 5.116 was derived from the subjective
evaluations of 10 persons standing on a vibrating platform. The subjects were ex-
posed to vertical steady-state vibration episodes each lasting approximately 5
minutes, and were asked to classify the vibration as (1) slightly perceptible, (2)
5.188                               SECTION FIVE


distinctly perceptible, (3) strongly perceptible, (4) disturbing, and (5) very disturb-
ing. The frequency and displacement ranges of the episodes were 5 to 70 Hz and
0.001 to 0.40 in, respectively.


5.23     MURRAY CRITERION FOR
         WALKING VIBRATIONS

5.23.1   Summary of the Criterion

In the criterion presented by Murray, an acceptable steel floor system is predicted,
with respect to vibration levels due to walking excitation, if the dynamic criterion
below is met. This criterion is applicable to offices and residences with fundamental
natural frequencies below 10 Hz.
   Murray criterion:
                                 D ⬎ 35A0 ƒ ⫹ 2.5
where D ⫽ damping in floor system, expressed as a percent of critical
     A0 ⫽ maximum initial amplitude of the floor system due to a heel-drop ex-
          citation, in
      ƒ ⫽ first natural frequency of the floor system, Hz
   This criterion is only applicable for the units specified. The reader is cautioned
against using other units.
                           SECTION SIX
            SOIL MECHANICS AND
               FOUNDATIONS
                                 Robert W. Day
                      Chief Engineer, American Geotechnical
                              San Diego, California




6.1     INTRODUCTION

6.1.1   Soil Mechanics

Soil mechanics is defined as the application of the laws and principles of mechanics
and hydraulics to engineering problems dealing with soil as an engineering material.
Soil has many different meanings, depending on the field of study. For example,
in agronomy (application of science to farming), soil is defined as a surface deposit
that contains mineral matter that originated from the original weathering of rock
and also contains organic matter that has accumulated through the decomposition
of plants and animals. To an agronomist, soil is that material that has been suffi-
ciently altered and supplied with nutrients that it can support the growth of plant
roots. But to a geotechnical engineer, soil has a much broader meaning and can
include not only agronomic material, but also broken-up fragments of rock, volcanic
ash, alluvium, aeolian sand, glacial material, and any other residual or transported
product of rock weathering. Difficulties naturally arise because there is not a distinct
dividing line between rock and soil. For example, to a geologist a given material
may be classified as a formational rock because it belongs to a definite geologic
environment, but to a geotechnical engineer it may be sufficiently weathered or
friable that it should be classified as a soil.


6.1.2   Rock Mechanics

Rock mechanics is defined as the application of the knowledge of the mechanical
behavior of rock to engineering problems dealing with rock. To the geotechnical
engineer, rock is a relatively solid mass that has permanent and strong bonds be-
tween the minerals. Rocks can be classified as being either sedimentary, igneous,
or metamorphic. There are significant differences in the behavior of soil versus
rock, and there is not much overlap between soil mechanics and rock mechanics.
                                          6.1
6.2                                       SECTION SIX


Table 6.1 presents a list of common soil and rock conditions that require special
consideration by the geotechnical engineer.


6.1.3   Foundation Engineering

A foundation is defined as that part of the structure that supports the weight of
the structure and transmits the load to underlying soil or rock. Foundation engi-
neering applies the knowledge of soil mechanics, rock mechanics, geology, and


TABLE 6.1 Problem Conditions Requiring Special Consideration

Problem
  type                Description                                  Comments
              Organic soil, highly plastic     Low strength and high compressibility
                soil
              Sensitive clay                   Potentially large strength loss upon large
                                                 straining
              Micaceous soil                   Potentially high compressibility
Soil          Expansive clay, silt, or slag    Potentially large expansion upon wetting
              Liquefiable soil                 Complete strength loss and high deformations
                                                 caused by earthquakes
              Collapsible soil                 Potentially large deformations upon wetting
              Pyritic soil                     Potentially large expansion upon oxidation
              Laminated rock                   Low strength when loaded parallel to bedding
              Expansive shale                  Potentially large expansion upon wetting;
                                                 degrades readily upon exposure to air and
                                                 water
              Pyritic shale                    Expands upon exposure to air and water
              Soluble rock                     Rock such as limestone, limerock, and gypsum
Rock                                             that is soluble in flowing and standing water
              Cretaceous shale                 Indicator of potentially corrosive groundwater
              Weak claystone                   Low strength and readily degradable upon
                                                 exposure to air and water
              Gneiss and schist                Highly distorted with irregular weathering
                                                 profiles and steep discontinuities
              Subsidence                       Typical in areas of underground mining or high
                                                 groundwater extraction
              Sinkholes                        Areas underlain by carbonate rock (Karst
                                                 topography)
              Negative skin friction           Additional compressive load on deep
                                                 foundations due to settlement of soil
              Expansion loading                Additional uplift load on foundation due to
Condition                                        swelling of soil
              Corrosive environment            Acid mine drainage and degradation of soil and
                                                 rock
              Frost and permafrost             Typical in northern climates
              Capillary water                  Rise in water level which leads to strength loss
                                                 for silts and fine sands
   Source: ‘‘Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges,’’ 16th ed., American Association of State
Highway and Transporation Officials, Washington, DC.
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.3


structural engineering to the design and construction of foundations for buildings
and other structures. The most basic aspect of foundation engineering deals with
the selection of the type of foundation, such as using a shallow or deep foundation
system. Another important aspect of foundation engineering involves the develop-
ment of design parameters, such as the bearing capacity of the foundation. Foun-
dation engineering could also include the actual foundation design, such as deter-
mining the type and spacing of steel reinforcement in concrete footings. As
indicated in Table 6.2, foundations are commonly divided into two categories: shal-
low and deep foundations.


6.2     FIELD EXPLORATION

The purpose of the field exploration is to obtain the following (M. J. Tomlinson,
‘‘Foundation Design and Construction,’’ 5th ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New
York):
 1. Knowledge of the general topography of the site as it affects foundation design
    and construction, e.g., surface configuration, adjacent property, the presence of
    watercourses, ponds, hedges, trees, rock outcrops, etc., and the available access
    for construction vehicles and materials.
 2. The location of buried utilities such as electric power and telephone cables,
    water mains, and sewers.
 3. The general geology of the area, with particular reference to the main geologic
    formations underlying the site and the possibility of subsidence from mineral
    extraction or other causes.
 4. The previous history and use of the site, including information on any defects
    or failures of existing or former buildings attributable to foundation conditions.
 5. Any special features such as the possibility of earthquakes or climate factors
    such as flooding, seasonal swelling and shrinkage, permafrost, and soil erosion.
 6. The availability and quality of local construction materials such as concrete
    aggregates, building and road stone, and water for construction purposes.
 7. For maritime or river structures, information on tidal ranges and river levels,
    velocity of tidal and river currents, and other hydrographic and meteorological
    data.
 8. A detailed record of the soil and rock strata and groundwater conditions within
    the zones affected by foundation bearing pressures and construction operations,
    or of any deeper strata affecting the site conditions in any way.
 9. Results of laboratory tests on soil and rock samples appropriate to the particular
    foundation design or construction problems.
10. Results of chemical analyses on soil or groundwater to determine possible
    deleterious effects of foundation structures.


6.2.1   Document Review

Some of the required information, such as the previous history and use of the site,
can be obtained from a document review. For example, there may be old engi-
TABLE 6.2 Common Types of Foundations

       Category            Common types                                                      Comments
                       Spread footings (also     Spread footings are often square in plan view, are of uniform reinforced concrete thickness, and
                         called pad footings)      are used to support a single column load located directly in the center of the footing.
                       Strip footings (also      Strip or wall footings are often used for load-bearing walls. They are usually long reinforced
                         called wall footings)     concrete members of uniform width and shallow depth.
                       Combined footings         Reinforced concrete combined footings that carry more than one column load are often rectangular
                                                   or trapezoidal in plan view.
Shallow foundations    Conventional slab-on-     A continuous reinforced concrete foundation consisting of bearing wall footings and a slab-on-
                         grade                     grade. Concrete reinforcement often consists of steel re-bar in the footings and wire mesh in the
                                                   concrete slab.
                       Post-tensioned slab-on-   A continuous post-tensioned concrete foundation. The post-tensioning effect is created by
                         grade                     tensioning steel tendons or cables embedded within the concrete. Common post-tensioned
                                                   foundations are the ribbed foundation, California Slab, and PTI foundation.
                       Raised wood floor         Perimeter footings that support wood beams and a floor system. Interior support is provided by
                                                   pad or strip footings. There is a crawl space below the wood floor.
                       Mat foundation            A large and thick reinforced concrete foundation, often of uniform thickness, that is continuous
                                                   and supports the entire structure. A mat foundation is considered to be a shallow foundation if it
                                                   is constructed at or near ground surface.
6.4
TABLE 6.2 Common Types of Foundations (Continued)

          Category                     Common types                                                                  Comments
                                  Driven piles                   Driven piles are slender members, made of wood, steel, or precast concrete, that are driven into
                                                                   place using pile-driving equipment.
                                  Other types of piles           There are many other types of piles, such as bored piles, cast-in-place piles, or composite piles.
                                  Piers                          Similar to cast-in-place piles, piers are often of large diameter and contain reinforced concrete. Pier
                                                                   and grade beam support are often used for foundation support on expansive soil.
                                  Caissons                       Large piers are sometimes referred to as caissons. A caisson can also be a watertight underground
                                                                   structure within which construction work is carried on.
Deep foundations                  Mat or raft foundation         If a mat or raft foundation is constructed below ground surface or if the mat or raft foundation is
                                                                    supported by piles or piers, then it should be considered to be a deep foundation system.
                                  Floating foundation            A special foundation type where the weight of the structure is balanced by the removal of soil and
                                                                   construction of an underground basement.
                                  Basement-type                  A common foundation for houses and other buildings in frost-prone areas. The foundation consists
                                    foundation                     of perimeter footings and basement walls that support a wood floor system. The basement floor
                                                                   is usually a concrete slab.
      Shallow and deep foundations in this table are based on the depth of the soil or rock support of the foundation.
6.5
6.6                                    SECTION SIX


neering reports indicating that the site contains deposits of fill, abandoned septic
systems and leach fields, buried storage tanks, seepage pits, cisterns, mining shafts,
tunnels, or other man-made surface and subsurface works that could impact the
new proposed development. There may also be information concerning on-site util-
ities and underground pipelines, which may need to be capped or rerouted around
the project.
    During the course of the work, it may be necessary to check reference materials,
such as geologic and topographic maps. Geologic maps can be especially useful
because they often indicate potential geologic hazards (e.g., faults, landslides) as
well as the type of near-surface soil or rock at the site. Both old and recent topo-
graphic maps can also provide valuable site information. Topographic maps are
usually to scale and show the locations of buildings, roads, freeways, train tracks,
and other civil engineering works as well as natural features such as canyons, rivers,
lagoons, sea cliffs, and beaches. The topographic maps can even show the locations
of sewage disposal ponds and water tanks, and by using different colors and shad-
ing, they indicate older versus newer development. But the main purpose of the
topographic map is to indicate ground surface elevations. This information can be
used to determine the major topographic features at the site and for the planning
of subsurface exploration, such as available site access for drilling rigs.
    Another important source of information is aerial photographs, which are taken
from an aircraft flying at a prescribed altitude along preestablished lines. Viewing
a pair of aerial photographs, with the aid of a stereoscope, provides a three-
dimensional view of the land surface. This view may reveal important geologic
information at the site, such as the presence of landslides, fault scarps, types of
landforms (e.g., dunes, alluvial fans, glacial deposits such as moraines and eskers),
erosional features, general type and approximate thickness of vegetation, and drain-
age patterns. By comparing older versus newer aerial photographs, the engineering
geologist can also observe any man-made or natural changes that have occurred at
the site.


6.2.2     Subsurface Exploration

In order for a detailed record of the soil and rock strata and groundwater conditions
at the site to be determined, subsurface exploration is usually required. There are
different types of subsurface exploration, such as borings, test pits, and trenches.
Table 6.3 summarizes the boring, core drilling, sampling, and other exploratory
techniques that can be used by the geotechnical engineer.
    A boring is defined as a cylindrical hole drilled into the ground for the purposes
of investigating subsurface conditions, performing field tests, and obtaining soil,
rock, or groundwater specimens for testing. Borings can be excavated by hand (e.g.,
with a hand auger), although the usual procedure is to use mechanical equipment
to excavate the borings.
    Many different types of equipment are used to excavate borings. Typical types
of borings are listed in Table 6.3 and include:
      Auger Boring. A mechanical auger is a very fast method of excavating a boring.
      The hole is excavated by rotating the auger while at the same time applying a
      downward pressure on the auger to help obtain penetration of the soil or rock.
      There are basically two types of augers: flight augers and bucket augers. Com-
      mon available diameters of flight augers are 5 cm to 1.2 m (2 in to 4 ft) and of
      bucket augers are 0.3 m to 2.4 m (1 ft to 8 ft). The auger is periodically removed
TABLE 6.3 Boring, Core Drilling, Sampling, and Other Exploratory Techniques*

          Method                        Procedure                    Type of sample                    Applications                     Limitations
           (1)                             (2)                             (3)                             (4)                             (5)
Auger boring, ASTM D           Dry hole drilled with hand     Auger cuttings, disturbed,       In soil and soft rock; to     Soil and rock stratification
  1452                           or power auger; samples        ground up, partially dried       identify geologic units and   destroyed; sample mixed
                                 preferably recovered from      from drill heat in hard          water content above water     with water below the
                                 auger flutes                   materials                        table                         water table
Test boring, ASTM D 1586       Hole drilled with auger or     Intact but partially disturbed   To identify soil or soft rock;   Gaps between samples, 30 to
                                 rotary drill; at intervals      (number of hammer blows         to determine water               120 cm (12 to 50 in);
                                 samples taken 36-mm             for second plus third           content; in classification       sample too distorted for
                                 (1.4-in) ID and 50-mm (2-       increment of driving is         tests and crude shear test       accurate shear and
                                 in) OD driven 0.45 m (1.5       standard penetration            of sample (N-value a             consolidation tests; sample
                                 ft) in three 150-mm (6-in)      resistance or N )               crude index to density of        limited by gravel; N-value
                                 increments by 64-kg (140-                                       cohesionless soil and            subject to variations,
                                 lb) hammer falling 0.76 m                                       undrained shear strength         depending on free fall of
                                 (30 in); hydrostatic                                            of cohesive soil)                hammer
                                 balance of fluid
                                 maintained below water
                                 level
Test boring of large samples   50- to 75-mm (2- to 3-in) ID Intact but partially disturbed     In gravelly soils                Sample limited by larger
                                 and 63- to 89-mm (2.5- to     (number of hammer blows                                            gravel
                                 3.5-in) OD samplers           for second plus third
                                 driven by hammers up to       increment of driving is
                                 160 kg (350 lb)               penetration resistance)
Test boring through hollow     Hole advanced by hollow        Intact but partially disturbed   In gravelly soils (not well      Sample limited by larger
  stem auger                     stem auger; soil sampled        (number of hammer blows         adapted to harder soils or       gravel; maintaining
                                 below auger as in test          for second plus third           soft rock)                       hydrostatic balance in
                                 boring above                    increment of driving is N-                                       hole below water table is
                                                                 value)                                                           difficult
6.7
TABLE 6.3 Boring, Core Drilling, Sampling, and Other Exploratory Techniques* (Continued)

           Method                        Procedure                    Type of sample                    Applications                      Limitations
            (1)                             (2)                             (3)                             (4)                              (5)
Rotary coring of soil or soft   Outer tube with teeth           Relatively undisturbed         In firm to stiff cohesive soils   Sample may twist in soft
  rock                            rotated; soil protected and     sample, 50 to 200 mm (2        and soft but coherent rock        clays; sampling loose sand
                                  held stationary in inner        to 8 in) wide and 0.3 to                                         below water table is
                                  tube; cuttings flushed          1.5 m (1 to 5 ft) long in                                        difficult; success in gravel
                                  upward by drill fluid           liner tube                                                       seldom occurs
                                  (examples: Denison,
                                  Pitcher, and Acker
                                  samplers)
Rotary coring of swelling       Similar to rotary coring of     Soil cylinder 28.5 to 53.2     In soils and soft rocks that      Sample smaller; equipment
  clay, soft rock                 rock; swelling core             mm (1.1 to 2.0 in) wide        swell or disintegrate             more complex
                                  retained by third inner         and 600 to 1500 mm (24         rapidly in air (protected
                                  plastic liner                   to 60 in) long, encased in     by plastic tube)
                                                                  plastic tube
Rotary coring of rock,          Outer tube with diamond bit     Rock cylinder 22 to 100 mm     To obtain continuous core in      Core lost in fractured or
  ASTM D 2113                     on lower end rotated to         (0.9 to 4 in) wide and as      sound rock (percent of            variable rock; blockage
                                  cut annular hole in rock;       long as 6 m (20 ft),           core recovered depends on         prevents drilling in badly
                                  core protected by               depending on rock              fractures, rock variability,      fractured rock; dip of
                                  stationary inner tube;          soundness                      equipment, and driller            bedding and joint evident
                                  cuttings flushed upward                                        skill)                            but not strike
                                  by drill fluid
Rotary coring of rock,          Similar to rotary coring of     Rock cylinder, typically 54 To determine strike of joints        Method may not be effective
  oriented core                   rock above; continuous          mm (2 in) wide and 1.5 m    and bedding                         in fractured rock
                                  grooves scribed on rock         (5 ft) long with compass
                                  core with compass               orientation
                                  direction
6.8
TABLE 6.3 Boring, Core Drilling, Sampling, and Other Exploratory Techniques* (Continued)

           Method                       Procedure                    Type of sample                  Applications                   Limitations
            (1)                            (2)                             (3)                           (4)                           (5)
 Rotary coring of rock, wire   Outer tube with diamond bit     Rock cylinder 36.5 to 85      To recover core better in      Same as ASTM D 2113 but
   line                          on lower end rotated to         mm (1.4 to 3.3 in) wide       fractured rock, which has      to lesser degree
                                 cut annular hole in rock;       and 1.5 to 4.6 m (5 to 15     less tendency for caving
                                 core protected by               ft) long                      during core removal; to
                                 stationary inner tube;                                        obtain much faster cycle
                                 cuttings flushed upward                                       of core recovery and
                                 by drill fluid; core and                                      resumption of drilling in
                                 stationary inner tube                                         deep holes
                                 retrieved from outer core
                                 barrel by lifting device or
                                 ‘‘overshot’’ suspended on
                                 thin cable (wire line)
                                 through special large-
                                 diameter drill rods and
                                 outer core barrel
 Rotary coring of rock,        22-mm (0.9-in) hole drilled     Continuous core reinforced    To obtain continuous core in
   integral sampling method      for length of proposed          by grouted steel rod          badly fractured, soft, or    Grout may not adhere in
                                 core; steel rod grouted                                       weathered rock in which        some badly weathered
                                 into hole; core drilled                                       recovery is low by ASTM        rock; fractures sometimes
                                 around grouted rod with                                       D 2113                         cause drift of diamond bit
                                 100- to 150-mm (4- to 6-                                                                     and cutting rod
                                 in) rock coring drill (same
                                 as for ASTM D 2113)
 Thin-wall tube, ASTM D        75- to 1250-mm (3–50 in)        Relatively undisturbed        In soft to firm clays, short   Cutting edge wrinkled by
   1587                          thin-wall tube forced into      sample, length 10 to 20       (5-diameter) samples of        gravel; samples lost in
                                 soil with static force (or      diameters                     stiff cohesive soil, soft      loose sand or very soft
                                 driven in soft rock);                                         rock and, with aid of          clay below water table;
                                 retention of sample helped                                    drilling mud, in firm to       more disturbance occurs if
                                 by drilling mud                                               dense sands                    driven with hammer
6.9
TABLE 6.3 Boring, Core Drilling, Sampling, and Other Exploratory Techniques* (Continued)

           Method                       Procedure                    Type of sample                   Applications                    Limitations
            (1)                            (2)                             (3)                            (4)                            (5)
Thin-wall tube, fixed piston   75- to 1250-mm (3- to 50-      Relatively undisturbed         To minimize disturbance of       Method is slow and
                                 in) thin-wall tube, which      sample, length 10 to 20        very soft clays (drilling       cumbersome
                                 has internal piston            diameters                      mud aids in holding
                                 controlled by rod and                                         samples in loose sand
                                 keeps loose cuttings from                                     below water table)
                                 tube, remains stationary
                                 while outer thin-wall tube
                                 forced ahead into soil;
                                 sample in tube is held in
                                 tube by aid of piston
Swedish foil                   Samples surrounded by thin     Continuous samples 50 mm       In soft, sensitive clays         Samples sometimes damaged
                                 strips of stainless steel,     (2 in) wide and as long as                                      by coarse sand and fine
                                 stored above cutter, to        12 m (40 ft)                                                    gravel
                                 prevent contact of soil
                                 with tube as it is forced
                                 into soil
Dynamic sounding               Enlarged disposable point on   None                           To identify significant          Misleading in gravel or
                                 end of rod driven by                                          differences in soil strength    loose saturated fine
                                 weight falling fixed                                          or density                      cohesionless soils
                                 distance in increments of
                                 100 to 300 mm (4 to 12
                                 in)
Static penetration             Enlarged cone, 36 mm (1.4      None                           To identify significant          Stopped by gravel or hard
                                 in) diameter and 60⬚ angle                                    differences in soil strength     seams
                                 forced into soil; force                                       or density; to identify soil
                                 measured at regular                                           by resistance of friction
                                 intervals                                                     sleeve
6.10
TABLE 6.3 Boring, Core Drilling, Sampling, and Other Exploratory Techniques* (Continued)

            Method                            Procedure                        Type of sample                       Applications                   Limitations
             (1)                                 (2)                                 (3)                                (4)                           (5)
Borehole camera                    Inside of core hole viewed          Visual representation               To examine stratification,     Best above water table or
                                     by circular photograph or                                               fractures, and cavities in     when hole can be
                                     scan                                                                    hole walls                     stabilized by clear water
Pits and trenches                  Pit or trench excavated to          Chunks cut from walls of            To determine structure of      Moving excavation
                                      expose soils and rocks             trench; size not limited            complex formations; to        equipment to site,
                                                                                                             obtain samples of thin        stabilizing excavation
                                                                                                             critical seams such as        walls, and controlling
                                                                                                             failure surface               groundwater may be
                                                                                                                                           difficult
Rotary or cable tool well          Toothed cutter rotated or           Ground                              To penetrate boulders, coarse Identifying soils or rocks
  drill                              chisel bit pounded and                                                  gravel; to identify           difficult
                                     churned                                                                 hardness from drilling
                                                                                                             rates
Percussion drilling (jack          Impact drill used; cuttings         Rock dust                           To locate rock, soft seams,    Drill becomes plugged by
  hammer or air track)               removed by compressed                                                   or cavities in sound rock      wet soil
                                     air
    * Reprinted with permission from ‘‘Landslides: Analysis and Control, Special Report 176,’’ Copyright 1978 by the
National Academy of Sciences. Courtesy of the National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
    Source:     G. F. Sowers and D. L. Royster, ‘‘Field Investigation,’’ ch. 4 of ‘‘Landslides: Analysis and Control,
Special Report 176,’’ ed. R. L. Schuster and R. J. Krizek, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC.
6.11
6.12                                  SECTION SIX


   from the hole, and the soil lodged in the groves of the flight auger or contained
   in the bucket of the bucket auger is removed. A casing is generally not used for
   auger borings, and the hole may cave-in during the excavation of loose or soft
   soils or when the excavation is below the groundwater table. Augers are probably
   the most common type of equipment used to excavate borings.
   Hollow-Stem Flight Auger. A hollow-stem flight auger has a circular hollow
   core which allows for sampling down the center of the auger. The hollow-stem
   auger acts like a casing and allows for sampling in loose or soft soils or when
   the excavation is below the groundwater table.
   Wash-Type Borings. Wash-type borings use circulating drilling fluid, which
   removes cuttings from the borehole. The cuttings are created by the chopping,
   twisting, and jetting action of the drill bit, which breaks the soil or rock into
   small fragments. Casings are often used to prevent cave-in of the hole. Because
   drilling fluid is used during the excavation, it can be difficult to classify the soil
   and obtain uncontaminated soil samples.
   Rotary Coring. This type of boring equipment uses power rotation of the drill-
   ing bit as circulating fluid removes cuttings from the hole. Table 6.3 lists various
   types of rotary coring for soil and rock.
   Percussion Drilling. This type of drilling equipment is often used to penetrate
   hard rock, for subsurface exploration or for the purpose of drilling wells. The
   drill bit works much like a jackhammer, rising and falling to break up and crush
   the rock material.
   In addition to borings, other methods for performing subsurface exploration in-
clude test pits and trenches. Test pits are often square in plan view, with a typical
dimension of 1.2 m by 1.2 m (4 ft by 4 ft). Trenches are long and narrow exca-
vations usually made by a backhoe or bulldozer. Table 6.4 presents the uses, ca-
pabilities, and limitations of test pits and trenches.
   Test pits and trenches provide for a visual observation of subsurface conditions.
They can also be used to obtain undisturbed block samples of soil. The process
consists of carving a block of soil from the side or bottom of the test pit or trench.
Soil samples can also be obtained from the test pits or trenches by manually driving
Shelby tubes, drive cylinders, or other types of sampling tubes into the ground.
(See Art. 6.2.3.)
   Backhoe trenches are an economical means of performing subsurface explora-
tion. The backhoe can quickly excavate the trench, which can then be used to
observe and test the in-situ soil. In many subsurface explorations, backhoe trenches
are used to evaluate near-surface and geologic conditions (i.e., up to 15 ft deep),
with borings being used to investigate deeper subsurface conditions.


6.2.3   Soil Sampling

Many different types of samplers are used to retrieve soil and rock specimens from
the borings. Common examples are indicated in Table 6.3. Figure 6.1 shows three
types of samplers, the ‘‘California Sampler,’’ Shelby tube sampler, and Standard
Penetration Test (SPT) sampler.
   The most common type of soil sampler used in the United States is the Shelby
tube, which is a thin-walled sampling tube. It can be manufactured to different
diameters and lengths, with a typical diameter varying from 5 to 7.6 cm (2 to 3 in)
and a length of 0.6 to 0.9 m (2 to 3 ft). The Shelby tube should be manufactured
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                   6.13


TABLE 6.4 Use, Capabilities, and Limitations of Test Pits and Trenches

Exploration method         General use             Capabilities             Limitations
Hand-excavated test   Bulk sampling, in-       Provides data in         Expensive, time-
  pits                  situ testing, visual     inaccessible areas,      consuming,
                        inspection               less mechanical          limited to depths
                                                 disturbance of           above
                                                 surrounding              groundwater level
                                                 ground
Backhoe-excavated     Bulk sampling, in-       Fast, economical,        Equipment access,
  test pits and         situ testing, visual     generally less than      generally limited
  trenches              inspection,              4.6 m (15 ft)            to depths above
                        excavation rates,        deep, can be up to       groundwater level,
                        depth of bedrock         9 m (30 ft) deep         limited
                        and groundwater                                   undisturbed
                                                                          sampling
Dozer cuts            Bedrock                  Relatively low cost,     Exploration limited
                        characteristics,         exposures for            to depth above the
                        depth of bedrock         geologic mapping         groundwater table
                        and groundwater
                        level, rippability,
                        increase depth
                        capability of
                        backhoe, level
                        area for other
                        exploration
                        equipment
Trenches for fault    Evaluation of            Definitive location of   Costly, time-
  investigations        presence and             faulting,                consuming,
                        activity of faulting     subsurface               requires shoring,
                        and sometimes            observation up to        only useful where
                        landslide features       9 m (30 ft) deep         dateable materials
                                                                          are present, depth
                                                                          limited to zone
                                                                          above the
                                                                          groundwater level
   Source: NAVFAC DM-7.1, 1982.



to meet exact specifications, such as those stated by ASTM D 1587-94 (1998). The
Shelby tube shown in Fig. 6.1 has an inside diameter of 6.35 cm (2.5 in).
   Many localities have developed samplers that have proven successful with local
soil conditions. For example, in southern California, a common type of sampler is
the California Sampler, which is a split-spoon type sampler that contains removable
internal rings, 2.54 cm (1 in) in height. Figure 6.1 shows the California Sampler
in an open condition, with the individual rings exposed. The California Sampler
has a 7.6-cm (3.0 in) outside diameter and a 6.35-cm (2.50-in) inside diameter.
This sturdy sampler, which is considered to be a thick-walled sampler, has proven
successful in sampling hard and desiccated soil and soft sedimentary rock common
in southern California.
   Three types of soil samples can be recovered from borings:
6.14                                    SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.1 Soil Samplers (no. 1 is the California Sampler in an open condition,
       no. 2 is a Shelby Tube, and no. 3 is the Standard Penetration Test sampler.)



    1. Altered Soil. During the boring operations, soil can be altered due to mixing
or contamination. For example, if the boring is not cleaned out prior to sampling,
a soil sample taken from the bottom of the borehole may actually consist of cuttings
from the side of the borehole. These borehole cuttings, which have fallen to the
bottom of the borehole, will not represent in-situ conditions at the depth sampled.
In other cases, the soil sample may become contaminated with drilling fluid, which
is used for wash-type borings. These types of soil samples that have been mixed
or contaminated by the drilling process should not be used for laboratory tests
because they will lead to incorrect conclusions regarding subsurface conditions.
Soil that has a change in moisture content due to the drilling fluid or heat generated
during the drilling operations should also be classified as altered soil. Soil that has
been densified by over-pushing or over-driving the soil sampler should also be
considered as altered because the process of over-pushing or over-driving could
squeeze water from the soil.
    2. Disturbed Samples. Disturbed soil is defined as soil that has been remolded
during the sampling process. For example, soil obtained from driven samplers, such
as the Standard Penetration Test spilt spoon sampler, or chunks of intact soil brought
to the surface in an auger bucket (i.e., bulk samples), are considered disturbed soil.
Disturbed soil can be used for numerous types of laboratory tests.
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.15


   3. Undisturbed Sample. It should be recognized that no soil sample can be
taken from the ground in a perfectly undisturbed state. However, this terminology
has been applied to those soil samples taken by certain sampling methods. Undis-
turbed samples are often defined as those samples obtained by slowly pushing thin-
walled tubes, having sharp cutting ends and tip relief, into the soil. Two parameters,
the inside clearance ratio and the area ratio, are often used to evaluate the dis-
turbance potential of different samplers, and they are defined as follows:

                                                        Di ⫺ De
                     inside clearance ratio (%) ⫽ 100                             (6.1)
                                                           De

                                                        D 2o ⫺ D 2i
                                 area ratio (%) ⫽ 100                             (6.2)
                                                            D 2i

where De ⫽ diameter at the sampler cutting tip
      Di ⫽ inside diameter of the sampling tube
      Do ⫽ outside diameter of the sampling tube
    In general, a sampling tube for undisturbed soil specimens should have an inside
clearance ratio of about 1% and an area ratio of about 10% or less. Having an
inside clearance ratio of about 1% provides for tip relief of the soil and reduces
the friction between the soil and inside of the sampling tube during the sampling
process. A thin film of oil can be applied at the cutting edge to also reduce the
friction between the soil and metal tube during sampling operations. The purpose
of having a low area ratio and a sharp cutting end is to slice into the soil with as
little disruption and displacement of the soil as possible. Shelby tubes are manu-
factured to meet these specifications and are considered to be undisturbed soil
samplers. As a comparison, the California Sampler has an area ratio of 44% and
is considered to be a thick-walled sampler.
    It should be mentioned that using a thin-walled tube, such as a Shelby tube, will
not guarantee an undisturbed soil specimen. Many other factors can cause soil
disturbance, such as:

• Pieces of hard gravel or shell fragments in the soil, which can cause voids to
    develop along the sides of the sampling tube during the sampling process
• Soil adjustment caused by stress relief when making a borehole
• Disruption of the soil structure due to hammering or pushing the sampling tube
    into the soil stratum
•   Expansion of gas during retrieval of the sampling tube
•   Jarring or banging the sampling tube during transportation to the laboratory
•   Roughly removing the soil from the sampling tube
•   Crudely cutting the soil specimen to a specific size for a laboratory test

    The actions listed above cause a decrease in effective stress, a reduction in the
interparticle bonds, and a rearrangement of the soil particles. An ‘‘undisturbed’’ soil
specimen will have little rearrangement of the soil particles and perhaps no distur-
bance except that caused by stress relief where there is a change from the in-situ
stress condition to an isotropic ‘‘perfect sample’’ stress condition. A disturbed soil
specimen will have a disrupted soil structure with perhaps a total rearrangement of
6.16                                 SECTION SIX


soil particles. When measuring the shear strength or deformation characteristics of
the soil, the results of laboratory tests run on undisturbed specimens obviously
better represent in-situ properties than laboratory tests run on disturbed specimens.
   Soil samples recovered from the borehole should be kept within the sampling
tube or sampling rings. The soil sampling tube should be tightly sealed with end
caps or the sampling rings thoroughly sealed in containers to prevent a loss of
moisture during transportation to the laboratory. The soil samples should be marked
with the file or project number, date of sampling, name of engineer or geologist
who performed the sampling, and boring number and depth.


6.2.4   Field Testing

There are many different types of tests that can be performed at the time of drilling.
The three most common types of field tests are discussed in this section:

Standard Penetration Test (SPT ). The Standard Penetration Test (SPT) consists
of driving a thick-walled sampler into a sand deposit. The SPT sampler must have
an inside barrel diameter (Di) ⫽ 3.81 cm (1.5 in) and an outside diameter (Do) ⫽
5.08 cm (2 in). The SPT sampler is shown in Fig. 6.1. The SPT sampler is driven
into the sand by using a 63.5-kg (140-lb.) hammer falling a distance of 0.76 m (30
in). The SPT sampler is driven a total of 45 cm (18 in), with the number of blows
recorded for each 15 cm (6 in) interval. The ‘‘measured SPT N value’’ (blows per
ft) is defined as the penetration resistance of the sand, which equals the sum of the
number of blows required to drive the SPT sampler over the depth interval of 15
to 45 cm (6 to 18 in). The reason the number of blows required to drive the SPT
sampler for the first 15 cm (6 in) is not included in the N value is that the drilling
process often disturbs the soil at the bottom of the borehole and the readings at 15
to 45 cm (6 to 18 in) are believed to be more representative of the in-situ penetration
resistance of the sand. The data below present a correlation between the measured
SPT N value (blows per ft) and the density condition of a clean sand deposit.


           N value (blows per ft)       Sand density        Relative density
                  0 to 4            Very loose condition       0   to   15%
                  4 to 10           Loose condition           15   to   35%
                 10 to 30           Medium condition          35   to   65%
                 30 to 50           Dense condition           65   to   85%
                 Over 50            Very dense condition      85   to   100%



   Relative density is defined in Art. 6.3.4. Note that the above correlation is very
approximate and the boundaries between different density conditions are not as
distinct as implied by the table.
   The measured SPT N value can be influenced by many testing factors and soil
conditions. For example, gravel-size particles increase the driving resistance (hence
increased N value) by becoming stuck in the SPT sampler tip or barrel. Another
factor that could influence the measured SPT N value is groundwater. It is important
to maintain a level of water in the borehole at or above the in-situ groundwater
level. This is to prevent groundwater from rushing into the bottom of the borehole,
which could loosen the sand and result in low measured N values.
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.17


   Besides gravel and groundwater conditions described above, there are many
different testing factors that can influence the accuracy of the SPT readings. For
example, the measured SPT N value could be influenced by the hammer efficiency,
rate at which the blows are applied, borehole diameter, and rod lengths. The fol-
lowing equation is used to compensate for these testing factors (A. W. Skempton,
‘‘Standard Penetration Test Procedures,’’ Geotechnique 36):

                               N60 ⫽ 1.67 EmCbCr N                                (6.3)
where N60 ⫽ SPT N value corrected for field testing procedures.
      Em ⫽ hammer efficiency (for U.S. equipment, Em equals 0.6 for a safety
            hammer and Em equals 0.45 for a donut hammer)
      Cb ⫽ borehole diameter correction (Cb ⫽ 1.0 for boreholes of 65 to 115
            mm (2.5 to 4.5 in) diameter, 1.05 for 150-mm diameter (5.9-in), and
            1.15 for 200-mm (7.9-in) diameter hole)
       Cr ⫽ Rod length correction (Cr ⫽ 0.75 for up to 4 m (13 ft) of drill rods,
            0.85 for 4 to 6 m (13 to 20 ft) of drill rods, 0.95 for 6 to 10 m (20
            to 33 ft) of drill rods, and 1.00 for drill rods in excess of 10 m (33
            ft)
       N ⫽ measured SPT N value
    Even with the limitations and all of the corrections that must be applied to the
measured SPT N value, the Standard Penetration Test is probably the most widely
used field test in the United States. This is because it is relatively easy to use, the
test is economical as compared to other types of field testing, and the SPT equip-
ment can be quickly adapted and included as part of almost any type of drilling
rig.

Cone Penetration Test (CPT ). The idea for the Cone Penetration Test (CPT) is
similar to that for the Standard Penetration Test, except that instead of a thick-
walled sampler being driven into the soil, a steel cone is pushed into the soil. There
are many different types of cone penetration devices, such as the mechanical cone,
mechanical-friction cone, electric cone, and piezocone. The simplest type of cone
is shown in Fig. 6.2. The cone is first pushed into the soil to the desired depth
(initial position) and then a force is applied to the inner rods that moves the cone
downward into the extended position. The force required to move the cone into the
extended position (Fig. 6.2) divided by the horizontally projected area of the cone
is defined as the cone resistance (qc). By continual repetition of the two-step process
shown in Fig. 6.2, the cone resistance data is obtained at increments of depth. A
continuous record of the cone resistance versus depth can be obtained by using the
electric cone, where the cone is pushed into the soil at a rate of 10 to 20 mm / sec
(2 to 4 ft / min). Figure 6.3 presents four simplified examples of cone resistance
(qc) versus depth profiles and the possible interpretation of the soil types and con-
ditions.
    A major advantage of the Cone Penetration Test is that by use of the electric
cone, a continuous subsurface record of the cone resistance (qc) can be obtained.
This is in contrast to the Standard Penetration Test, which obtains data at intervals
in the soil deposit. Disadvantages of the Cone Penetration Test are that soil samples
can not be recovered and special equipment is required to produce a steady and
slow penetration of the cone. Unlike the SPT, the ability to obtain a steady and
slow penetration of the cone is not included as part of conventional drilling rigs.
Because of these factors, in the United States the CPT is used less frequently than
the SPT.
6.18                                    SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.2 Example of Mechanical Cone Penetrometer Tip (Dutch Mantle
       Cone). (Reprinted with permission from the American Society for Testing and Ma-
       terials, 1998.)



Vane Shear Test (VST ). The SPT and CPT are used to correlate the resistance
of driving a sampler (N value) or pushing a cone (qc) with the engineering properties
(such as density condition) of the soil. In contrast, the Vane Test is a different in-
situ field test because it directly measures a specific soil property, the undrained
shear strength (su) of clay. Shear strength will be further discussed in Art. 6.3.6.
    The Vane Test consists of inserting a four-bladed vane, such as shown in
Fig. 6.4, into the borehole and then pushing the vane into the clay deposit located
at the bottom of the borehole. Once the vane is inserted into the clay, the maximum
torque (Tmax) required to rotate the vane and shear the clay is measured. The un-
drained shear strength (su) of the clay can then be calculated by using the following
equation, which assumes uniform end shear for a rectangular vane:
                                              Tmax
                              su ⫽                                                       (6.4)
                                     ␲ (0.5 D H ⫹ 0.167D 3)
                                             2



where Tmax ⫽ maximum torque required to rotate the rod which shears the clay
        H ⫽ height of the vane
        D ⫽ diameter of the vane
The vane can provide an undrained shear strength (su) that is too high if the vane
is rotated too rapidly. The vane test also gives unreliable results for clay strata that
                            SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                   6.19




        FIGURE 6.3 Simplified examples of CPT cone resistance qc versus depth showing
        possible interpretations of soil types and conditions. (From J. H. Schmertmann,
        ‘‘Guidelines for Cone Penetration Test.’’ U.S. Department of Transportation, Wash-
        ington, DC.)



contains sand layers or lenses, varved clay, or if the clay contains gravel or gravel-
size shell fragments.


6.2.5    Exploratory Logs

A log is defined as a written record, prepared during the subsurface excavation of
borings, test pits, or trenches, that documents the observed conditions. Although
logs are often prepared by technicians or even the driller, the most appropriate
individuals to log the subsurface conditions are geotechnical engineers or engi-
neering geologists who have considerable experience and judgment acquired by
many years of field practice. It is especially important that the subsurface conditions
likely to have the most impact on the proposed project be adequately described.
Figure 6.5 presents an example of a boring log.
6.20                             SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.4 Diagram illustrating the Field Vane Test. (From NAVFAC
       DM-7.1, 1982.)
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                        6.21




FIGURE 6.5 Example of a Boring log. (Reproduced from NAVFAC DM-7.1, 1982.)



6.2.6   Subsoil Profile

The final part of Art. 6.2 presents an example of a subsoil profile. As shown in
Figure 6.6, the subsoil profile summarizes the results of the subsurface exploration.
The results of field and laboratory tests are often included on the subsoil profile.
The development of a subsoil profile is often a required element for geotechnical
and foundation engineering analyses. For example, subsoil profiles are used to de-
6.22




       FIGURE 6.6 Subsoil profile. (From J. Lowe and P. F. Zaccheo, ‘‘Subsurface Explorations and Sampling,’’
       ch. 1 of ‘‘Foundation Engineering Handbook,’’ ed. H. F. Winterkorn and H.-Y. Fang, Van Nostrand Reinhold
       Co., New York.)
                           SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                  6.23


termine the foundation type (shallow versus deep foundation), calculate the amount
of settlement of the structure, evaluate the effect of groundwater on the project and
develop recommendations for dewatering of underground structures, perform slope
stability analyses for projects having sloping topography, and prepare site devel-
opment recommendations.


6.3     LABORATORY TESTING

6.3.1   Introduction

In addition to document review and subsurface exploration, an important part of
the site investigation is laboratory testing. The laboratory testing usually begins
once the subsurface exploration is complete. The first step in the laboratory testing
is to log in all of the materials (soil, rock, or groundwater) recovered from the
subsurface exploration. Then the geotechnical engineer and engineering geologist
prepare a laboratory testing program, which basically consists of assigning specific
laboratory tests for the soil specimens. The actual laboratory testing of the soil
specimens is often performed by experienced technicians, who are under the su-
pervision of the geotechnical engineer. Because the soil samples can dry out or
changes in the soil structure could occur with time, it is important to perform the
laboratory tests as soon as possible.
    Usually at the time of the laboratory testing, the geotechnical engineer and en-
gineering geologist will have located the critical soil layers or subsurface conditions
that will have the most impact on the design and construction of the project. The
laboratory testing program should be oriented towards the testing of those critical
soil layers or subsurface conditions. For many geotechnical projects, it is also im-
portant to determine the amount of ground surface movement due to construction
of the project. In these cases, laboratory testing should model future expected con-
ditions so that the amount of movement or stability of the ground can be analyzed.
    Laboratory tests should be performed in accordance with standard procedures,
such as those recommended by the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM) or those procedures listed in standard textbooks or specification manuals.
    For laboratory tests, it has been stated (M. J. Tomlinson, ‘‘Foundation Design
and Construction,’’ 5th ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York):

       It is important to keep in mind that natural soil deposits are variable in composition
   and state of consolidation; therefore it is necessary to use considerable judgment based
   on common sense and practical experience in assessing test results and knowing where
   reliance can be placed on the data and when they should be discarded. It is dangerous
   to put blind faith in laboratory tests, especially when they are few in number. The test
   data should be studied in conjunction with the borehole records and the site observa-
   tions, and any estimations of bearing pressures or other engineering design data ob-
   tained from them should be checked as far as possible with known conditions and past
   experience. Laboratory tests should be as simple as possible. Tests using elaborate
   equipment are time-consuming and therefore costly, and are liable to serious error
   unless carefully and conscientiously carried out by highly experienced technicians. Such
   methods may be quite unjustified if the samples are few in number, or if the cost is
   high in relation to the cost of the project. Elaborate and costly tests are justified only
   if the increased accuracy of the data will give worthwhile savings in design or will
   eliminate the risk of a costly failure.
6.24                                    SECTION SIX


6.3.2   Soil Element

In order to analyze the results of laboratory tests, the concept of the soil element
must be introduced. Figure 6.7 shows an element of soil that can be divided into
three basic parts:
1. Solids—the mineral soil particles
2. Liquids—usually water that is contained in the void spaces between the solid
   mineral particles
3. Gas—such as air that is also contained in the void spaces between the solid
   mineral particles
   As indicated on the right side of Fig. 6.7, the three basic parts of soil can be
rearranged into their relative proportions based on volume and mass. Note that the
symbols as defined in Fig. 6.7 will be used throughout this section.


6.3.3   Index Tests

Index tests are the most basic types of laboratory tests performed on soil samples.
Index tests include the water content (also known as moisture content), specific
gravity tests, unit weight determinations, and particle size distributions and Atter-
berg limits, which are used to classify the soil.

Water Content (w). The water content (also known as moisture content) test is
probably the most common and simplest type of laboratory test. This test can be
performed on disturbed or undisturbed soil specimens. The water content test con-
sists of determining the mass of the wet soil specimen and then drying the soil in
an oven overnight (12 to 16 hr) at a temperature of 110⬚C (ASTM D 2216-92,
1998). The water content (w) of a soil is defined as the mass of water in the soil
(Mw) divided by the dry mass of the soil (Ms), expressed as a percentage (i.e.,
w ⫽ 100 Mw / Ms).




        FIGURE 6.7 Soil element and the soil element separated into phases.
                               SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                      6.25


   Values of water content (w) can vary from essentially 0% up to 1200%. A water
content of 0% indicates a dry soil. An example of a dry soil would be near-surface
rubble, gravel, or clean sand located in a hot and dry climate, such as Death Valley,
California. Soil having the highest water content is organic soil, such as fibrous
peat, which has been reported to have a water content as high as 1200%.

Specific Gravity of Soil Solids (G). The specific gravity (G) is a dimensionless
parameter that is defined as the density of solids ( ␳s) divided by the density of
water ( ␳w), or G ⫽ ␳s / ␳w. The density of solids ( ␳s) is defined as the mass of solids
(Ms) divided by the volume of solids (Vs). The density of water ( ␳w) is equal to
1 g / cm3 (or 1 Mg / m3) and 62.4 pcf.
    For soil, the specific gravity is obtained by measuring the dry mass of the soil
and then using a pycnometer to obtain the volume of the soil. Table 6.5 presents
typical values and ranges of specific gravity versus different types of soil minerals.
Because quartz is the most abundant type of soil mineral, the specific gravity for
inorganic soil is often assumed to be 2.65. For clays, the specific gravity is often
assumed to be 2.70 because common clay particles, such as montmorillonite and
illite, have slightly higher specific gravity values.

Total Unit Weight (␥t ). The total unit weight (also known as the wet unit weight)
should only be obtained from undisturbed soil specimens, such as those extruded
from Shelby tubes or on undisturbed block samples obtained from test pits and
trenches. The first step in the laboratory testing is to determine the wet density,
defined as ␳t ⫽ M / V, where M ⫽ total mass of the soil, which is the sum of the
mass of water (Mw) and mass of solids (Ms), and V ⫽ total volume of the soil


TABLE 6.5 Formula and Specific Gravity of Common Soil Minerals

                                               Specific
 Type of mineral             Formula           gravity                       Comments
Quartz                  SiO2                     2.65         Silicate, most common type of soil
                                                                 mineral
K Feldspar              KAlSi3O8              2.54–2.57       Feldspars are also silicates and are
Na or Ca Feldspar       NaAlSi3O8             2.62–2.76          the second most common type of
                                                                 soil mineral.
Calcite                 CaCO3                    2.71         Basic constituent of carbonate rocks
Dolomite                CaMg(CO3)2               2.85         Basic constituent of carbonate rocks
Muscovite               varies                2.76–3.0        Silicate sheet type mineral (mica
                                                                 group)
Biotite                 complex                 2.8–3.2       Silicate sheet type mineral (mica
                                                                 group)
Hematite                Fe2O3                   5.2–5.3       Frequent cause of reddish-brown
                                                                 color in soil
Gypsum                  CaSO42H2O               2.35         Can lead to sulfate attack of concrete
Serpentine              Mg3Si2O5(OH)4          2.5–2.6        Silicate sheet or fibrous type mineral
Kaolinite               Al2Si2O5(OH)4         2.61–2.66       Silicate clay mineral, low activity
Illite                  complex               2.60–2.86       Silicate clay mineral, intermediate
                                                                 activity
Montmorillonite         complex               2.74–2.78       Silicate clay mineral, highest activity
   NOTE:     Silicates are very common and account for about 80% of the minerals at the Earth’s surface.
6.26                                          SECTION SIX


sample as defined in Fig. 6.7. The volume (V ) is determined by trimming the soil
specimen to a specific size or extruding the soil specimen directly from the sampler
into confining rings of known volume, and then the total mass (M) of the soil
specimen is obtained by using a balance.
   The next step is to convert the wet density ( ␳t) to total unit weight (␥t). In order
to convert wet density to total unit weight in the International System of Units (SI),
the wet density is multiplied by g (where g ⫽ acceleration of gravity ⫽ 9.81 m /
sec2) to obtain the total unit weight, which has units of kN / m3. For example, in
the International System of Units, the density of water ( ␳w) ⫽ 1.0 g / cm3 or 1.0
Mg / m3, while the unit weight of water (␥w) ⫽ 9.81 kN / m3.
   In the United States Customary System, density and unit weight have exactly
the same value. Thus, the density of water and the unit weight of water are 62.4
pcf. However, for the density of water ( ␳w), the units should be thought of as lb-
mass (lbm) per cubic ft, while for unit weight (␥w), the units are lb-force (lbf) per
cubic foot. In the United States Customary System, it is common to assume that
1 lbm ⫽ 1 lbf.
   Typical values for total unit weight (␥t) are 110 to 130 pcf (17 to 20 kN / m3).
Besides the total unit weight, other types of unit weight are used in geotechnical
engineering. For example, the dry unit weight (␥d ) refers to only the dry soil per
volume, while the saturated unit weight (␥sat) refers to a special case where all the
soil voids are filled with water (i.e., saturated soil). Another commonly used unit
weight is the buoyant unit weight (␥b) which is used for calculations involving soil
located below the groundwater table. Table 6.6 presents various equations used to



TABLE 6.6 Unit Weight Relationships*

         Parameter                                              Relationships
                                            Ws ⫹ Ww G␥w(1 ⫹ w)
Total unit weight (␥t)               ␥t ⫽          ⫽
                                               V      1⫹e
                                            Ws   G␥w   ␥t
Dry unit weight (␥d )                ␥d ⫽      ⫽     ⫽
                                            V    1⫹e 1⫹w
                                           Ws ⫹ Vv␥w (G ⫹ e)␥w G␥w(1 ⫹ w)
Saturated unit weight (␥sat)         ␥sat ⫽             ⫽             ⫽
                                                V            1⫹e          1⫹Gw
                                     Note: The total unit weight (␥t) is equal to the saturated unit
                                           weight (␥sat) when all the void spaces are filled with
                                           water (i.e., S ⫽ 100%).
                                     ␥b ⫽ ␥sat ⫺ ␥w
Buoyant unit weight (␥b)                  ␥w(G ⫺ 1) ␥w(G ⫺ 1)
                                     ␥b ⫽           ⫽
                                             1⫹e        1⫹Gw
                                     Note: The buoyant unit weight is also known as the
                                           submerged unit weight.
    * See Fig. 6.7 for definition of terms.
    Notes:
    1. For the equations listed in this table, water content (w) and degree of saturation (S ) must be
expressed as a decimal (not as a percentage).
    2. ␳w ⫽ density of water (1.0 Mg / m3, 62.4 pcf) and ␥w ⫽ unit weight of water (9.81 kN / m3, 62.4 pcf).
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                         6.27


calculate the different types of unit weights. Note in Table 6.6 that w ⫽ water
content and G ⫽ specific gravity of soil solids. The void ratio (e) and degree of
saturation (S) are discussed in the next article.


6.3.4    Phase Relationships
Phase relationships are the basic soil relationships used in geotechnical engineering.
They are also known as weight-volume relationships. Different types of phase re-
lationships are discussed below:

Void Ratio (e) and Porosity (n). The void ratio (e) is defined as the volume of
voids (Vv) divided by the volume of solids (Vs). The porosity (n) is defined as
volume of voids (Vv) divided by the total volume (V). As indicated in Fig. 6.7, the
volume of voids is defined as the sum of the volume of air and volume of water
in the soil.
   The void ratio (e) and porosity (n) are related as follows:
                                n                       e
                          e⫽             and      n⫽                             (6.5)
                               1⫺n                     1⫹e
    The void ratio and porosity indicate the relative amount of void space in a soil.
The lower the void ratio and porosity, the denser the soil (and vice versa). The
natural soil having the lowest void ratio is probably till. For example, a typical
value of dry density for till is 2.34 Mg / m3 (146 pcf), which corresponds to a void
ratio of 0.14. A typical till consists of a well-graded soil ranging in particle sizes
from clay to gravel and boulders. The high density and low void ratio are due to
the extremely high stress exerted by glaciers. For compacted soil, the soil type with
typically the lowest void ratio is a well-graded decomposed granite (DG). A typical
value of maximum dry density (Modified Proctor) for a well-graded DG is 2.20
Mg / m3 (137 pcf), which corresponds to a void ratio of 0.21. In general, the factors
needed for a very low void ratio for compacted and naturally deposited soil are as
follows:
1.   A well-graded grain-size distribution
2.   A high ratio of D100 / D0 (ratio of the largest and smallest grain sizes)
3.   Clay particles (having low activity) to fill in the smallest void spaces
4.   A process, such as compaction or the weight of glaciers, to compress the soil
     particles into dense arrangements
   At the other extreme are clays, such as sodium montmorillonite, which at low
confining pressures can have a void ratio of more than 25. Highly organic soil,
such as peat, can have even higher void ratios.

Degree of Saturation (S). The degree of saturation (S) is defined as:
                                            100 Vw
                                   S(%) ⫽                                        (6.6)
                                              Vv
     The degree of saturation indicates the degree to which the soil voids are filled
6.28                                      SECTION SIX


with water. A totally dry soil will have a degree of saturation of 0%, while a
saturated soil, such as a soil below the groundwater table, will have a degree of
saturation of 100%. Typical ranges of degree of saturation versus soil condition are
as follows:

Dry:                S   ⫽   0%
Humid:              S   ⫽   1 to 25%
Damp:               S   ⫽   26 to 50%
Moist:              S   ⫽   51 to 75%
Wet:                S   ⫽   76 to 99%
Saturated:          S   ⫽   100%

Relative Density. The relative density is a measure of the density state of a non-
plastic soil. The relative density can only be used for soil that is nonplastic, such
as sands and gravels. The relative density (Dr in %) is defined as:

                                                 emax ⫺ e
                                 Dr(%) ⫽ 100                                    (6.7)
                                                emax ⫺ emin
where emax ⫽ void ratio corresponding to the loosest possible state of the soil, usu-
             ally obtained by pouring the soil into a mold of known volume
      emin ⫽ void ratio corresponding to the densest possible state of the soil,
             usually obtained by vibrating the soil particles into a dense state
         e ⫽ the natural void ratio of the soil

   The density state of the natural soil can be described as follows:

Very loose condition             Dr   ⫽   0 to 15%
Loose condition                  Dr   ⫽   15 to 35%
Medium condition                 Dr   ⫽   35 to 65%
Dense condition                  Dr   ⫽   65 to 85%
Very dense condition             Dr   ⫽   85 to 100%

  The relative density (Dr) should not be confused with the relative compaction
(RC), which will be discussed in Art. 6.10.1.

Useful Relationships. A frequently used method of solving phase relationships is
first to fill in the phase diagram shown in Fig. 6.7. Once the different mass and
volumes are known, the various phase relationships can be determined. Another
approach is to use equations that relate different parameters. A useful relationship
is as follows:

                                           Gw ⫽ Se                              (6.8)

where G   ⫽   specific gravity of soil solids
      w   ⫽   water content
      S   ⫽   degree of saturation
      e   ⫽   void ratio
   Other commonly used relationships are presented in Table 6.7.
                               SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.29


TABLE 6.7 Mass and Volume Relationships*

Parameter                                          Relationships
                                        M G M
             Mass of solids (Ms) ⫽     ⫽ w ⫽ GV␳w(1 ⫺ n)
                                   1⫹w   eS

Mass                                    eMsS
             Mass of water (Mw) ⫽            ⫽ wMs ⫽ S␳wVv
                                         G

             Total mass (M ) ⫽ Ms ⫹ Mw ⫽ Ms(1 ⫹ w)
                                             Ms    V    V
             Volume of solids (Vs) ⫽            ⫽      ⫽ v ⫽ V(1 ⫺ n) ⫽ V ⫺ (Vg ⫹ Vw)
                                            G ␳w 1 ⫹ e   e

                                            Mw    SVe
             Volume of water (Vw) ⫽            ⫽      ⫽ SVs e ⫽ S Vv ⫽ Vv ⫺ Vg
                                            ␳w   1⫹e

                                        (1 ⫺ S )Ve
Volume       Volume of gas (Vg) ⫽                  ⫽ (1 ⫺ S )Vse ⫽ V ⫺ (Vs ⫹ Vw) ⫽ Vv ⫺ Vw
                                          1⫹e

                                             Vsn      Ms    Ve
             Volume of voids (Vv) ⫽              ⫽V⫺     ⫽      ⫽ Vse ⫽ V ⫺ Vs
                                            1⫺n      G ␳w 1 ⫹ e

                                       Vs  V (1 ⫹ e)
             Total volume (V ) ⫽          ⫽ v        ⫽ Vs(1 ⫹ e) ⫽ Vs ⫹ Vg ⫹ Vw
                                      1⫺n      e
   *See Fig. 6.7 for definition of terms.



6.3.5    Soil Classification

The purpose of soil classification is to provide the geotechnical engineer with a
way to predict the behavior of the soil for engineering projects. There are many
different soil classification systems in use, and only three of the most commonly
used systems will be discussed in this section.

Unified Soil Classification System (USCS). As indicated in Table 6.8, this clas-
sification system separates soils into two main groups: coarse-grained soils (more
than 50% by weight of soil particles retained on No. 200 sieve) and fine-grained
soils (50% or more by weight of soil particles pass the No. 200 sieve).
    The coarse-grained soils are divided into gravels and sands. Both gravels and
sands are further subdivided into four secondary groups as indicated in Table 6.8.
The four secondary classifications are based on whether the soil is well graded,
poorly graded, contains silt-sized particles, or contains clay-sized particles. These
data are obtained from a particle size distribution, also known as a ‘‘grain size
curve,’’ which is obtained from laboratory testing (sieve and hydrometer tests).
Figure 6.8 presents examples of grain size curves.
    The Atterberg limits are used to classify fine-grained soil, and they are defined
as follows:
   Liquid Limit (LL). The water content corresponding to the behavior change
   between the liquid and plastic state of a silt or clay. The liquid limit is deter-
TABLE 6.8 Unified Soil Classification System (USCS)

                                           USCS
 Major divisions       Subdivisions       symbol              Typical names                         Laboratory classification criteria
                                                      Well-graded gravels or gravel-    Less than 5% finesa        Cu ⱖ 4 and 1 ⱕ Cc ⱕ 3
                                            GW         sand mixtures, little or no
                     Gravels                           fines
                                                      Poorly graded gravels or          Less than 5% finesa        Does not meet Cu and / or Cc
                     (More than 50%
                                            GP          gravelly sands, little or no                                 criteria listed above
                       of coarse
                                                        fines
                       fraction
                       retained on          GM        Silty gravels, gravel-sand-silt   More than 12% finesa       Minus No. 40 soil plots below
                       No. 4 sieve)                      mixtures                                                   the A-line
Coarse-grained
  soils                                     GC        Clayey gravels, gravel-sand-      More than 12% finesa       Minus No. 40 soil plot on or
                                                        clay mixtures                                               above the A-line
(More than 50%                              SW        Well-graded sands or gravelly     Less than 5% finesa        Cu ⱖ 6 and 1 ⱕ Cc ⱕ 3
  retained on No.                                      sands, little or no fines
  200 sieve)         Sands
                                                      Poorly graded sands or            Less than 5% finesa        Does not meet Cu and / or Cc
                                            SP          gravelly sands, little or no                                 criteria listed above
                     (50% or more of
                                                        fines
                       coarse
                       fraction             SM        Silty sands, sand-silt mixtures   More than 12% finesa       Minus No. 40 soil plots below
                       passes No. 4                                                                                 the A-line
                       sieve)
                                            SC        Clayey sands, sand-clay           More than 12% finesa       Minus No. 40 soil plots on or
                                                        mixtures                                                    above the A-line
6.30
TABLE 6.8 Unified Soil Classification System (USCS) (Continued)

                                                      USCS
  Major divisions             Subdivisions           symbol                   Typical names                                  Laboratory classification criteria
                                                       ML            Inorganic silts, rock flour,             Inorganic soil                PI ⬍ 4 or plots below A-line
                                                                       silts of low plasticity
                                                        CL           Inorganic clays of low                   Inorganic soil                PI ⬎ 7 and plots on or above
                           Silts and clays
                                                                       plasticity, gravelly clays,                                            A-lineb
                                                                       sandy clays, etc.
                           (liquid limit less
                              than 50)                  OL           Organic silts and organic                Organic soil                  LL (oven dried) / LL (not
                                                                       clays of low plasticity                                                dried) ⬍ 0.75
Fine-grained soils

(50% or more                                           MH            Inorganic silts, micaceous               Inorganic soil                Plots below A-line
  passes the No.                                                       silts, silts of high plasticity
                           Silts and clays
  200 sieve)                                           CH            Inorganic highly plastic clays,          Inorganic soil                Plots on or above A-line
                           (liquid limit 50                            fat clays, silty clays, etc.
                              or more)                 OH            Organic silts and organic                Organic soil                  LL (oven dried) / LL (not
                                                                       clays of high plasticity                                               dried) ⬍ 0.75

Peat                       Highly organic               PT           Peat and other highly organic            Primarily organic matter, dark in color, and organic odor
                                                                       soils
    a
      ‘‘Fines’’ are those soil particles that pass the No. 200 sieve. For gravels with between 5% to 12% fines, use of
dual symbols required (i.e., GW-GM, GW-GC, GP-GM, or GP-GC). For sands with between 5% to 12% fines, use of
dual symbols required (i.e., SW-SM, SW-SC, SP-SM, or SP-SC).
    b
      If 4 ⱕ PI ⱕ 7 and plots above A-line, then dual symbol (i.e., CL-ML) is required.
    c
      Cu ⫽ D60 / D10 and Cc ⫽ (D30)2 / [(D10)(D60)] where D60 ⫽ soil particle diameter corresponding to 60% finer by
weight (from grain size curve).
6.31
   FIGURE 6.8 Examples of grain size curves and Atterberg limit test data for different soils. Note that w1 ⫽
   liquid limit and wp ⫽ plastic limit. (Reproduced from M. P. Rollings and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Materials
   in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
6.32
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.33


   mined in the laboratory by using a liquid limit device. The liquid limit is defined
   as the water content at which a pat of soil, cut by a groove of standard dimen-
   sions, will flow together for a distance of 12.7 mm (0.5 in) under the impact of
   25 blows in a standard liquid limit device.
   Plastic Limit (PL). The water content corresponding to the behavior change
   between the plastic and semisolid state of a silt or clay. The plastic limit is also
   determined in the laboratory and is defined as the water content at which a silt
   or clay will just begin to crumble when rolled into a tread approximately 3.2
   mm (0.125 in) in diameter.
    The plasticity index (PI) is defined as the liquid limit minus the plastic limit
(i.e., PI ⫽ LL ⫺ PL). With both the liquid limit and plasticity index of the fine-
grain soil known, the plasticity chart (Fig. 6.9) is then used to classify the soil.
There are three basic dividing lines on the plasticity chart, the LL ⫽ 50 line, the
A-line, and the U-line. The LL ⫽ 50 line separates soils into high and low plasticity,
the A-line separates clays from silts, and the U-line represents the upper-limit line
(i.e., uppermost boundary of test data).
    As indicated in Table 6.8, symbols (known as ‘‘group symbols’’) are used to
identify different soil types. The group symbols consist of two capital letters. The
first letter indicates the following: G for gravel, S for sand, M for silt, C for clay,
and O for organic. The second letter indicates the following: W for well graded,
which indicates that a coarse-grained soil has particles of all sizes; P for poorly
graded, which indicates that a coarse-grained soil has particles of the same size, or
the soil is skip-graded or gap-graded; M for a coarse-grained soil that has silt-sized
particles; C for a coarse-grained soil that has clay-sized particles; L for a fine-
grained soil of low plasticity; and H for a fine-grained soil of high plasticity. An
exception is peat, where the group symbol is PT. Also note in Table 6.8 that certain
soils require the use of dual symbols.

AASHTO Soil Classification System. This classification system was developed
by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (see
Table 6.9). Inorganic soils are divided into 7 groups (A-1 through A-7), with the




       FIGURE 6.9 Plasticity chart.
 TABLE 6.9 AASHTO Soil Classification System

                                 AASHTO                                                   Sieve analysis
 Major Divisions     Group        symbol              Typical names                     (percent passing)                     Atterberg limits
                   Group A-1     A-1-a         Stone or gravel fragments      Percent Passing: No. 10 ⱕ 50%              PI ⱕ 6
                                                                              No. 40 ⱕ 30% No. 200 ⱕ 15%

 Granual                         A-1-b         Gravel and sand mixtures       No. 40 ⱕ 50%     No. 200 ⱕ 25%             PI ⱕ 6
   materials       Group A-3     A-3           Fine sand that is nonplastic   No. 40 ⬎ 50%     No. 200 ⱕ 10%             PI ⫽ 0 (nonplastic)
 (35% or less                    A-2-4         Silty gravel and sand          Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⱕ 35%        LL ⱕ 40     PI ⱕ 10
   passing No.     Group A-2     A-2-5         Silty gravel and sand          Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⱕ 35%        LL ⬎ 40     PI ⱕ 10
   200 sieve)
                                 A-2-6         Clayey gravel and sand         Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⱕ 35%        LL ⱕ 40     PI ⬎ 10
                                 A-2-7         Clayey gravel and sand         Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⱕ 35%        LL ⬎ 40     PI ⬎ 10
                   Group A-4     A-4           Silty soils                    Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⬎ 35%        LL ⱕ 40     PI ⱕ 10
                   Group A-5     A-5           Silty soils                    Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⬎ 35%        LL ⬎ 40     PI ⱕ 10
 Silt-clay
    materials      Group A-6     A-6           Clayey soils                   Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⬎ 35%        LL ⱕ 40     PI ⬎ 10

 (More than 35%                  A-7-5         Clayey soils                   Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⬎ 35%        LL ⬎ 40     PI ⱕ LL ⫺ 30
   passing No.     Group A-7                                                                                             PI ⬎ 10
   200 sieve)                    A-7-6         Clayey soils                   Percent passing No. 200 sieve ⬎ 35%        LL ⬎ 40     PI ⬎ LL ⫺ 30
                                                                                                                         PI ⬎ 10
 Highly organic    Group A-8     A-8           Peat and other highly          Primarily organic matter, dark in color, and organic odor
                                                 organic soils
6.34
   Notes:
   1. Classification Procedure: First decide which of the three main categories (granular materials, silt-clay materials,
      or highly organic) the soil belongs. Then proceed from the top to the bottom of the chart and the first group that
      meets the particle size and Atterberg limits criteria is the correct classification.
   2. Group Index ⫽ (F ⫺ 35)[0.2 ⫹ 0.005(LL ⫺ 40)] ⫹ 0.01(F ⫺ 15)(PI ⫺ 10), where F ⫽ percent passing No.
      200 sieve, LL ⫽ liquid limit, and PI ⫽ plasticity index. Report group index to nearest whole number. For negative
      group index, report as zero. When working with A-2-6 and A-2-7 subgroups, use only the PI portion of the
      group index equation.
   3. Atterberg limits are performed on soil passing the No. 40 sieve. LL ⫽ liquid limit, PL ⫽ plastic limit, and
      PI ⫽ plasticity index.
   4. AASHTO definitions of particle sizes are as follows: (a) boulders: above 75 mm, (b) gravel: 75 mm to No. 10
      sieve, (c) coarse sand: No. 10 to No. 40 sieve, (d) fine sand: No. 40 to No. 200 sieve, and (e) silt-clay size
      particles: material passing No. 200 sieve.
   5. Example: An example of an AASHTO classification for a clay is A-7-6 (30), or Group A-7, subgroup 6, group
      index 30.
6.35
6.36                                 SECTION SIX


eighth group (A-8) reserved for highly organic soils. Soil types A-1, A-2, and
A-7 have subgroups as indicated in Table 6.9. Those soils having plastic fines can
be further categorized by using the group index (defined in Table 6.9). Groups
A-1-a, A-1-b, A-3, A-2-4, and A-2-5 should be considered to have a group index
equal to zero. According to AASHTO, the road supporting characteristics of a
subgrade may be assumed as an inverse ratio to its group index. Thus, a road
subgrade having a group index of 0 indicates a ‘‘good’’ subgrade material that will
often provide good drainage and adequate bearing when thoroughly compacted. A
road subgrade material that has a group index of 20 or greater indicates a ‘‘very
poor’’ subgrade material that will often be impervious and have a low bearing
capacity.

Organic Soil Classification System. Table 6.10 presents a classification system
for organic materials. As indicated in Table 6.10, there are four major divisions, as
follows:
1. Organic Matter. These materials consist almost entirely of organic material.
   Examples include fibrous peat and fine-grained peat.
2. Highly Organic Soils. These soils are composed of 30 to 75% organic matter
   mixed with mineral soil particles. Examples include silty peat and sandy peat.
3. Organic Soils. These soils are composed of from 5 to 30% organic material.
   These soils are typically classified as organic soils of high plasticity (OH, i.e.
   LL ⱖ 50) or low plasticity (OL, i.e., LL ⬍ 50) and have a ratio of liquid limit
   (oven-dried soil) divided by liquid limit (not dried soil) that is less than 0.75
   (see Table 6.8).
4. Slightly Organic Soils. These soils typically have less than 5% organic matter.
   Per the Unified Soil Classification System, they have a ratio of liquid limit (oven-
   dried soil) divided by liquid limit (not dried soil) that is greater than 0.75. Often
   a modifier, such as ‘‘slightly organic soil,’’ is used to indicate the presence of
   organic matter.
   Also included in Table 6.10 is the typical range of laboratory test results for the
four major divisions of organic material. Note in Table 6.10 that the water content
(w) increases and the total unit weight (␥t) decreases as the organic content in-
creases. The specific gravity (G) includes the organic matter, hence the low values
for highly organic material. The compression index (Cc) is discussed in Art. 6.5.6.

Other Descriptive Terminology. In addition to the classification of a soil, other
items should also be included in the field or laboratory description of a soil, such
as:
1. Soil Color. Usually the standard primary color (red, orange, yellow, etc.) of the
   soil is listed.
2. Soil Texture. The texture of a soil refers to the degree of fineness of the soil.
   For example, terms such as smooth, gritty, or sharp can be used to describe
   the texture of the soil when it is rubbed between the fingers.
3. Clay Consistency. For clays, the consistency (i.e., degree of firmness) should
   be listed. The consistency of a clay varies from ‘‘very soft’’ to ‘‘hard’’ based on
   the undrained shear strength of the clay (su). The undrained shear strength can
   be determined from the Unconfined Compression Test or from field or laboratory
   vane tests. The consistency versus undrained shear strength (su) is as follows:
       TABLE 6.10 Soil Classification for Organic Soil

           Major                 Organic              USCS                                     Distinguishing characteristics for
          divisions              content             symbol            Typical names                  visual identification          Typical range of laboratory test results
                                                    PT                Fibrous peat             Light weight and spongy.             w ⫽ 500 to 1200%
                                                                        (woody,                  Shrinks considerably on air        ␥t ⫽ 9.4 to 11 kN / m3 (60 to 70 pcf)
                               75 to 100%                               mats, etc.)              drying. Much water squeezes        G ⫽ 1.2 to 1.8
                                 Organics                                                        from sample.                       Cc / (1 ⫹ eo) ⱖ 0.40
       Organic matter            (Either
                                 visible or         PT                Fine-grained             Light weight and spongy.             w ⫽ 400 to 800% PI ⫽ 200 to 500
                                 inferred)                              peat                     Shrinks considerably on air        ␥t ⫽ 9.4 to 11 kN / m3 (60 to 70 pcf)
                                                                        (amorphous)              drying. Much water squeezes        G ⫽ 1.2 to 1.8
                                                                                                 from sample.                       Cc / (1 ⫹ eo) ⱖ 0.35
                                                    PT                Silty peat               Relatively light weight, spongy.     w ⫽ 250 to 500% PI ⫽ 150 to 350
                                                                                                 Shrinks on air drying.             ␥t ⫽ 10 to 14 kN / m3 (65 to 90 pcf)
                               30 to 75%                                                         Usually can readily squeeze        G ⫽ 1.8 to 2.3
                                 Organics                                                        water from sample.                 Cc / (1 ⫹ eo) ⫽ 0.3 to 0.4
       Highly organic
                                 (Either
         soils                                      PT                Sandy peat               Sand fraction visible. Shrinks       w ⫽ 100 to 400% PI ⫽ 50 to 150
                                 visible or
                                 inferred)                                                       on air drying. Often a             ␥t ⫽ 11 to 16 kN / m3 (70 to 100 pcf)
                                                                                                 ‘‘gritty’’ texture. Usually can    G ⫽ 1.8 to 2.4
                                                                                                 squeeze water from sample.         Cc / (1 ⫹ eo) ⫽ 0.2 to 0.3
                                                    OH                Clayey organic           Often has strong hydrogen            w ⫽ 65 to 200% PI ⫽ 50 to 150
                                                                        Silt                     sulfide (H2S) odor. Medium         ␥t ⫽ 11 to 16 kN / m3 (70 to 100 pcf)
                               5 to 30%                                                          dry strength and slow              G ⫽ 2.3 to 2.6
                                  organics                                                       dilatency.                         Cc / (1 ⫹ eo) ⫽ 0.2 to 0.35
       Organic soils              (Either
                                  visible or        OL                Organic sand             Threads weak and friable near        w ⫽ 30 to 125% PI ⫽ NP to 40
                                  inferred)                             or Silt                  plastic limit, or will not roll    ␥t ⫽ 14 to 17 kN / m3 (90 to 110 pcf)
                                                                                                 at all. Low dry strength,          G ⫽ 2.4 to 2.6
                                                                                                 medium to high dilatency.          Cc / (1 ⫹ eo) ⫽ 0.1 to 0.25
       Slightly                Less than            Use Table         Soil with                Depends on the characteristics       Depends on the characteristics of the
          organic soils          5%                   6.8               slight                   of the inorganic fraction.           inorganic fraction.
                                 organics                               organic
                                                                        fraction
           Source: NAVFAC DM-7.1, 1982, based on unpublished work by Ayers and Plum.
           Notes: w ⫽ in-situ water content, PI ⫽ plasticity index, NP ⫽ nonplastic, ␥t ⫽ total unit weight, G ⫽ specific
       gravity (soil minerals plus organic matter), Cc ⫽ compression index, eo ⫽ initial void ratio, and Cc / (1 ⫹ eo) ⫽ modified
       compression index.
6.37
6.38                                 SECTION SIX


   Soil consistency     Undrained shear strength (kPa)     Undrained shear strength (psf)
        Very soft                  su ⬍ 12                          su ⬍ 250
        Soft                    12 ⱕ su ⬍ 25                     250 ⱕ su ⬍ 500
        Medium                  25 ⱕ su ⬍ 50                     500 ⱕ su ⬍ 1000
        Stiff                   50 ⱕ su ⬍ 100                   1000 ⱕ su ⬍ 2000
        Very stiff             100 ⱕ su ⬍ 200                   2000 ⱕ su ⬍ 4000
        Hard                      su ⱖ 200                         su ⱖ 4000

4. Sand Density Condition. For sands, the density state of the soil varies from
   ‘‘very loose’’ to ‘‘very dense.’’ The determination of the density condition is
   based on the relative density (Dr in %).
5. Soil Moisture Condition. The moisture condition of the soil should also be
   listed. Based on the degree of saturation, the moisture conditions can vary from
   a ‘‘dry’’ soil (S ⫽ 0%) to a ‘‘saturated’’ soil (S ⫽ 100%).
6. Additional Descriptive Items. The soil classification systems are usually only
   applicable for soil and rock particles passing the 75-mm (3-in) sieve. Cobbles
   and boulders are larger than the 75 mm (3 in), and if applicable, the words
   ‘‘with cobbles’’ or ‘‘with boulders’’ should be added to the soil classification.
   Typically, cobbles refer to particles ranging from 75 mm (3 in) to 200 mm (8
   in) and boulders refer to any particle over 200 mm (8 in).

Other descriptive terminology includes the presence of rock fragments, such as
‘‘crushed shale, claystone, sandstone, siltstone, or mudstone fragments,’’ and unu-
sual constituents such as ‘‘shells, slag, glass fragments, and construction debris.’’
    Soil classification examples are shown on the boring log in Fig. 6.5. Common
types of soil deposits are listed in Table 6.11.



6.3.6    Shear Strength Tests

The shear strength of a soil is a basic geotechnical engineering parameter and is
required for the analysis of foundations, earthwork, and slope stability problems.
This is because of the nature of soil, which is composed of individual soil particles
that slide (i.e., shear past each other) when the soil is loaded.
    The shear strength of the soil can be determined in the field (e.g., vane shear
test) or in the laboratory. Laboratory shear strength tests can generally be divided
into two categories:

1. Shear Strength Tests Based on Total Stress. The purpose of these laboratory
   tests is to obtain the undrained shear strength (su) of the soil or the failure
   envelope in terms of total stresses (total cohesion, c, and total friction angle, ␾).
   These types of shear strength tests are often referred to as ‘‘undrained’’ shear
   strength tests.
2. Shear Strength Tests Based on Effective Stress. The purpose of these labo-
   ratory tests is to obtain the effective shear strength of the soil based on the
   failure envelope in terms of effective stress (effective cohesion, c⬘, and effective
   friction angle, ␾ ⬘). These types of shear strength tests are often referred to as
   ‘‘drained’’ shear strength tests. The shear strength of the soil can be defined as
   (Mohr-Coulomb failure law):
                              SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                    6.39


TABLE 6.11 Common Man-made and Geologic Soil Deposits

   Main
  category              Common types of soil deposits              Possible engineering problems
Structural fill   Dense or hard fill. Often the individual      Upper surface of structural fill may
                    fill lifts can be identified                  have become loose or weathered
Uncompacted       Random soil deposit that can contain          Susceptible to compression and
  fill              chunks of different types and sizes           collapse
                    of rock fragments
Debris fill       Contains pieces of debris, such as            Susceptible to compression and
                    concrete, brick, and wood fragments           collapse
Municipal         Contains debris and waste products            Significant compression and gas
 dump               such as household garbage or yard             from organic decomposition
                    trimmings
Residual soil     Soil deposits formed by in-place              Engineering properties are highly
  deposit           weathering of rock                            variable
Organic           Examples include peat and muck                Very compressible and unsuitable
  deposit           which forms in bogs, marshes, and             for foundation support
                    swamps
Alluvial          Soil transported and deposited by             All types of grain sizes, loose
  deposit           flowing water, such as streams and            sandy deposits susceptible to
                    rivers                                        liquefaction
Aeolian           Soil transported and deposited by             Can have unstable soil structure
  deposit           wind. Examples include loess and              that may be susceptible to
                    dune sands                                    collapse
Glacial           Soil transported and deposited by             Erratic till deposits and soft clay
  deposit           glaciers or their melt water.                 deposited by glacial melt water
                    Examples include till.
Lacustrine        Soil deposited in lakes or other inland       Unusual soil deposits can form,
  deposit           bodies of water                               such as varved silts or varved
                                                                  clays
Marine            Soil deposited in the ocean, often            Granular shore deposits but
 deposit            from rivers that empty into the               offshore areas can contain soft
                    ocean                                         clay deposits
Colluvial         Soil transported and deposited by             Can be geologically unstable
  deposit           gravity, such as talus, hill-wash, or         deposit
                    landslide deposits
Pyroclastic       Material ejected from volcanoes.              Weathering can result in plastic
  deposit           Examples include ash, lapilli, and           clay. Ash can be susceptible to
                    bombs                                        erosion.
   NOTE: The first four soil deposits are man-made, all others are due to geologic processes.




                                      ␶ƒ ⫽ c ⬘ ⫹ ␴ ⬘n tan ␾⬘                                    (6.9)

   where ␶ ƒ      ⫽   shear strength of the soil
         c⬘       ⫽   effective cohesion
         ␴ n⬘     ⫽   effective normal stress on the shear surface
         ␾⬘       ⫽   effective friction angle

   The mechanisms that control the shear strength of soil are complex, but in simple
6.40                                   SECTION SIX


terms the shear strength of soils can be divided into two broad categories: granular
(nonplastic) soils and cohesive (plastic) soils.

Granular Soil. These types of soil are nonplastic and include gravels, sands, and
nonplastic silt such as rock flour. A granular soil develops its shear strength as a
result of the frictional and interlocking resistance between the individual soil par-
ticles. Granular soils, also known as cohesionless soils, can only be held together
by confining pressures and will fall apart when the confining pressure is released
(i.e., c ⬘ ⫽ 0). The drained shear strength (effective stress analysis) is of most
importance for granular soils. The shear strength of granular soils is often measured
in the direct shear apparatus, where a soil specimen is subjected to a constant
vertical pressure (␴ ⬘n ) while a horizontal force is applied to the top of the shear box
so that the soil specimen is sheared in half along a horizontal shear surface (see
Fig. 6.10). By plotting the vertical pressure (␴ ⬘n ) versus shear stress at failure (␶ƒ ),
the effective friction angle (␾ ⬘) can be obtained. Because the test specifications
typically require the direct shear testing of soil in a saturated and drained state, the
shear strength of the soil is expressed in terms of the effective friction angle (␾ ⬘).
Granular soils can also be tested in a dry state, and the shear strength of the soil
is then expressed in terms of the friction angle (␾). In a comparison of the effective
friction angle (␾ ⬘) from drained direct shear tests on saturated cohesionless soil
and the friction angle (␾) from direct shear tests on the same soil in a dry state, it
has been determined that ␾ ⬘ is only 1 to 2⬚ lower than ␾. This slight difference is
usually ignored and the friction angle (␾) and effective friction angle (␾ ⬘) are
typically considered to mean the same thing for granular (nonplastic) soils.
    Table 6.12 presents values of effective friction angles for different types of gran-
ular (nonplastic) soils. An exception to the values presented in Table 6.12 are gran-
ular soils that contain appreciable mica flakes. A micaceous sand will often have
a high void ratio and hence little interlocking and a lower friction angle. In sum-
mary, for granular soils, c ⬘ ⫽ 0 and the effective friction angle (␾ ⬘) depends on:
1. Soil Type (Table 6.12). Sand and gravel mixtures have a higher effective friction
   angle than nonplastic silts.
2. Soil Density. For a given granular soil, the denser the soil, the higher the effec-
   tive friction angle. This is due to the interlocking of soil particles, where at a




       FIGURE 6.10 Direct shear apparatus.
                               SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                               6.41


              TABLE 6.12 Typical Effective Friction Angles (␾⬘) for Different
              Cohesionless Soils*

                                            Effective friction angles (␾⬘) at peak
                                                            strength
                  Soil types               Loose            Medium              Dense
              Silt (nonplastic)          26 to 30⬚          28 to 32⬚          30 to 34⬚
              Uniform fine to            26 to 30⬚          30 to 34⬚          32 to 36⬚
                 medium sand
              Well-graded sand           30 to 34⬚          34 to 40⬚          38 to 46⬚
              Sand and gravel            32 to 36⬚          36 to 42⬚          40 to 48⬚
                 mixtures
                 * Data from B. K. Hough, ‘‘Basic Soils Engineering,’’ 2d ed., John Wiley
              & Sons, Inc., New York.



     denser state the soil particles are interlocked to a higher degree and hence the
     effective friction angle is greater than in a loose state. It has been observed that
     in the ultimate shear strength state, the shear strength and density of a loose and
     dense sand tend to approach each other.
3.   Grain Size Distribution. A well-graded granular soil will usually have a higher
     friction angle than a uniform soil. With more soil particles to fill in the small
     spaces between soil particles, there is more interlocking and frictional resistance
     developed for a well-graded than a uniform granular soil.
4.   Mineral Type, Angularity, and Particle Size. Soil particles composed of quartz
     tend to have a higher friction angle than soil particles composed of weak car-
     bonate. Angular soil particles tend to have rougher surfaces and better inter-
     locking ability. Larger-sized particles, such as gravel-sized particles, typically
     have higher friction angles than sand.
5.   Deposit Variability. Because of variations in soil types, gradations, particle ar-
     rangements, and dry density values, the effective friction angle is rarely uniform
     with depth. It takes considerable judgment and experience in selecting an effec-
     tive friction angle based on an analysis of laboratory data.
6.   Indirect Methods. For many projects, the effective friction angle of the sand is
     determined by indirect means, such as the Standard Penetration Test and the
     Cone Penetration Test.

Cohesive Soil. The shear strength of cohesive (plastic) soil, such as silts and clays,
is much more complicated than the shear strength of granular soils. Also, in general
the shear strength of cohesive (plastic) soils tends to be lower than the shear strength
of granular soils. As a result, more shear-induced failures occur in cohesive soils,
such as clays, than in granular (nonplastic) soils.
   Depending on the type of loading condition, either a total stress analysis or an
effective stress analysis could be performed for cohesive soil. In general, total stress
analysis (su or c and ␾) are used for short-term conditions, such as at the end of
construction. The total stress parameters, such as the undrained shear strength (su),
can be determined from an unconfined compression test or vane tests.
       Figure 6.11 presents an example of the undrained shear strength (su) versus
depth for Borings E1 and F1 excavated in an offshore deposit of Orinoco clay
(created by sediments from the Orinoco River, Venezuela). The Orinoco clay can
be generally classified as a clay of high plasticity (CH) and can be considered to
FIGURE 6.11 Undrained shear strength versus depth for Orinoco clay at Borings E1 and F1.
6.42
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.43


be a relatively uniform soil deposit. The undrained shear strength was obtained
from the Torvane device, laboratory vane, and unconfined compression test (UUC).
Note in Fig. 6.11 that there is a distinct discontinuity in the undrained shear strength
(su) at a depth of 60 ft for Boring E1 and 40 ft for Boring F1. This discontinuity
was due to different sampling procedures. Above a depth of 60 ft at Boring E1 and
40 ft at Boring F1, samplers were hammered into the clay deposit, causing sample
disturbance and a lower shear strength value for the upper zone of clay. For the
deeper zone of clay, a ‘‘WIP’’ sampling procedure was utilized, which produced
less sample disturbance and hence a higher undrained shear strength.
    Effective stress analyses (c ⬘ and ␾⬘) are used for long-term conditions, where
the soil and groundwater conditions are relatively constant. Effective shear strength
parameters are often obtained from laboratory triaxial tests, where a saturated soil
specimen is sheared by applying a load to the top of the specimen (see Fig. 6.12).
During shearing, the pore water pressures (u) are measured in order to calculate
the effective friction angle of the soil. Typical values of the effective friction angle
(␾⬘) for natural clays range from around 20⬚ for normally consolidated highly plas-
tic clays up to 30⬚ or more for other types of plastic (cohesive) soil. The value of
␾⬘ for compacted clay is typically in the range of 25⬚ to 30⬚ and occasionally as
high as 35⬚. In terms of effective cohesion for plastic soil, the value of c⬘ for
normally consolidated noncemented clays is very small and can be assumed to be
zero for practical work. These effective friction angles (␾⬘) for cohesive soil are
less than the values for granular soil (Table 6.12), and this is the reason there are
more shear failures in cohesive than in granular soil.



6.4     EFFECTIVE STRESS AND STRESS
        DISTRIBUTION

It is important to recognize that without adequate and meaningful data from the
field exploration (Art. 6.2) and laboratory testing (Art. 6.3), the engineering analysis
presented in the rest of this chapter will be of doubtful value and may even lead
to erroneous conclusions. The purpose of the engineering analysis is often to de-
velop site development and foundation design parameters required for the project.


6.4.1   Effective Stress, Total Stress, and Pore Water Pressure

The soil has been described in terms of a written description (soil classification)
and mathematical description (phase relationships). The next step in the analysis is
often to determine the stresses acting on the soil. This is important because most
geotechnical projects deal with a change in stress of the soil. For example, the
construction of a building applies an additional stress onto the soil supporting the
foundation, which results in settlement of the building.
    Stress is defined as the load divided by the area over which it acts. In geotech-
nical engineering, a compressive stress is considered positive and tensile stress is
negative. Stress and pressure are often used interchangeably in geotechnical engi-
neering. In the International System of Units (SI), the units for stress are kPa. In
the United States Customary System, the units for stress are psf (lb-force per square
ft). Stress expressed in units of kg / cm2 have been used in the past and are still in
use (e.g., see Fig. 6.11). One kg / cm2 is approximately equal to 100 kPa and one
ton per square ft (tsf).
6.44                                  SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.12 Triaxial apparatus.



Effective Stress. An important concept in geotechnical engineering is effective
stress. The effective stress (␴ ⬘) is defined as follows:
                                     ␴⬘ ⫽ ␴ ⫺ u                                   (6.10)
where ␴ ⫽ total stress
      u ⫽ pore water pressure
Many engineering analyses use the vertical effective stress, also known as the ef-
fective overburden stress, which is designated ␴ v⬘ or ␴ vo
                                                         ⬘.

Total Stress. For the condition of a uniform soil and a level ground surface (geo-
static condition), the total vertical stress (␴v) at a depth (z) below the ground surface
is:
                                         ␴v ⫽ ␥t z                                (6.11)
where ␥t ⫽ total unit weight of the soil (Table 6.6). For soil deposits having layers
with different total unit weights, the total vertical stress is the sum of the vertical
stress for each individual soil layer.

Pore Water Pressure (u) and Calculation of Vertical Effective Stress (␴ ⬘v). For
the condition of a hydrostatic groundwater table (i.e., no groundwater flow or excess
pore water pressures), the static pore water pressure (u or us) is:
                                         u ⫽ ␥w zw                                (6.12)
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                             6.45


where ␥w ⫽ unit weight of water
      zw ⫽ depth below the groundwater table
   If the total unit weight of the soil (Eq. 6.11), and the pore water pressure (Eq.
6.12) are known, then the vertical effective stress (␴ ⬘v ) can be calculated. An alter-
native method is to use the buoyant unit weight (␥b , see Table 6.6) to calculate the
vertical effective stress. For example, suppose that a groundwater table corresponds
with the ground surface. In this case, the vertical effective stress (␴ ⬘v ) is simply the
buoyant unit weight (␥b) times the depth below the ground surface. More often, the
groundwater table is below the ground surface, in which case the vertical total stress
of the soil layer above the groundwater table must be added to the buoyant unit
weight calculations.


6.4.2   Stress Distribution

The previous section described methods used to determine the existing stresses
within the soil mass. This section describes commonly used methods to determine
the increase in stress in the soil deposit due to applied loads. This is naturally
important in settlement analysis because the settlement of the structure is due di-
rectly to its weight, which causes an increase in stress in the underlying soil. In
most cases, it is the increase in vertical stress that is of most importance in settle-
ment analyses. The symbol ␴z is often used to denote an increase in vertical stress
in the soil, although ⌬␴v (change in total vertical stress) is also used.
   When dealing with stress distribution, a distinction must be made between one-
dimensional and two- or three-dimensional loading. A one-dimensional loading
applies a stress increase at depth that is 100% of the applied surface stress. An
example of a one-dimensional loading would be the placement of a fill layer of
uniform thickness and large areal extent at ground surface. Beneath the center of
the uniform fill, the in-situ soil is subjected to an increase in vertical stress that
equals the following:
                                   ␴z ⫽ ⌬␴v ⫽ h␥t                                  (6.13)
where h ⫽ thickness of the fill layer
     ␥t ⫽ total unit weight of the fill
In this case of one-dimensional loading, the soil would only be compressed in the
vertical direction (i.e., strain only in the vertical direction).
   Another example of one-dimensional loading is the uniform lowering of a
groundwater table. If the total unit weight of the soil does not change as the ground-
water table is lowered, then the one-dimensional increase in vertical stress for the
in-situ soil located below the groundwater table would equal the following:
                                    ␴z ⫽ ⌬␴v ⫽ h␥w                                 (6.14)
where h ⫽ vertical distance that the groundwater table is uniformly lowered
     ␥w ⫽ unit weight of water
   Surface loadings can cause both vertical and horizontal strains, and this is re-
ferred to as two- or three-dimensional loading. Common examples of two-
dimensional loading are from strip footings or long embankments (i.e., plane strain
conditions). Examples of three-dimensional loading would be square and rectan-
6.46                                   SECTION SIX


gular footings (spread footings) and round storage tanks. The following two sections
describe methods that can be used to determine the change in vertical stress for
two-dimensional (strip footings and long embankments) and three-dimensional
(spread footings and round storage tanks) loading conditions. In these cases, the
load usually dissipates rapidly with depth. The following methods will yield dif-
ferent answers for a given set of conditions. The reader is cautioned to follow any
limitations mentioned.

2:1 Approximation. A simple method to determine the increase in vertical stress
with depth is the 2:1 approximation (also known as the 2:1 method). Figure 6.13
illustrates the basic principle of the 2:1 approximation. This method assumes that
the stress dissipates with depth in the form of a trapezoid that has 2:1 (vertical:
horizontal) inclined sides as shown in Fig. 6.13. The purpose of this method is to
approximate the actual ‘‘pressure bulb’’ stress increase beneath a footing.
    If there is a strip footing of width B that has a vertical load ( P) per unit length
of footing, then, as indicated in Fig. 6.13, the stress applied by the footing (␴o)
would be ␴o ⫽ P / B where B ⫽ width of the strip footing. As indicated in Fig.
6.13, at a depth z below the footing, the vertical stress increase (␴z) due to the strip
footing load would be:

                                                  P
                                   ␴z ⫽ ⌬␴v ⫽                                          (6.15)
                                                 B⫹z

  If the footing is a rectangular spread footing having a length ⫽ L and a width
⫽ B, then the stress applied by the rectangular footing (␴o) would be ␴o ⫽ P / (BL)
where P ⫽ entire load of the rectangular spread footing. Based on the 2:1 approx-
imation, the vertical stress increase (␴z) at a depth ⫽ z below the rectangular spread
footing would be:




       FIGURE 6.13 2:1 approximation for the calculation of the increase in vertical
       stress at depth due to an applied load ( P).
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.47


                                                P
                             ␴z ⫽ ⌬␴v ⫽                                          (6.16)
                                          (B ⫹ z)(L ⫹ z)
    A major advantage of the 2:1 approximation is its simplicity, and for this reason
it is probably used more often than any other type of stress distribution method.
The main disadvantage with the 2:1 approximation is that the stress increase under
the center of the loaded area equals the stress increase under the corner or side of
the loaded area. The actual situation is that the soil underlying the center of the
loaded area is subjected to a higher vertical stress increase than the soil underneath
a corner or edge of the loaded area. Thus, the 2:1 approximation is often only used
to estimate the average settlement of the loaded area. Different methods, such as
stress distribution based on the theory of elasticity, can be used to calculate the
change in vertical stress between the center and corner of the loaded area.

Equations and Charts Based on the Theory of Elasticity. Equations and charts
have been developed to determine the change in stress due to applied loads based
on the theory of elasticity. The solutions assume an elastic and homogeneous soil
that is continuous and in static equilibrium. The elastic solutions also use a specific
type of applied load, such as a point load, uniform load, or linearly increasing load
(triangular distribution). For loads where the length of the footing is greater than 5
times the width, such as for strip footings, the stress distribution is considered to
be plane strain. This means that the horizontal strain of the elastic soil occurs only
in the direction perpendicular to the long axis of the footing.
    Although equations and charts based on the theory of elasticity are often used
to determine the change in soil stress, soil is not an elastic material. For example,
if a heavy foundation load is applied to a soil deposit, there will be vertical defor-
mation of the soil in response to this load. If this heavy load is removed, the soil
will rebound but not return to its original height because soil is not elastic. However,
it has been stated that as long as the factor of safety against shear failure exceeds
about 3, then stresses imposed by the foundation load are roughly equal to the
values computed from elastic theory.
    In 1885, Boussinesq published equations based on the theory of elasticity. For
a surface point load (Q) applied at the ground surface such as shown in Figure
6.14, the vertical stress increase at any depth (z) and distance (r) from the point
load can be calculated by using the following Boussinesq (1885) equation:
                                                3Qz 3
                             ␴z ⫽ ⌬␴v ⫽                                          (6.17)
                                           2␲ (r 2 ⫹ z2)5 / 2
   If there is a uniform line load Q (force per unit length), the vertical stress
increase at a depth z and distance r from the line load would be:
                                                2Qz3
                               ␴z ⫽ ⌬␴v ⫽                                        (6.18)
                                            ␲ (r 2 ⫹ z2)2
    In 1935, Newmark performed an integration of Eq. (6.18) and derived an equa-
tion to determine the vertical stress increase (␴z) under the corner of a loaded area.
Convenient charts have been developed based on the Newmark (1935) equation.
For example, Figure 6.15 shows the ‘‘pressure bulbs’’ (also known as isobars) be-
neath a square footing and a strip footing. To determine the change in vertical stress
(i.e., ␴z or ⌬␴v) at any point below the footing, multiply the value from Figure 6.15
times qo, where qo ⫽ uniform applied footing pressure.
6.48                                  SECTION SIX




                  FIGURE 6.14 Definition of terms for Eqs. (6.17) and
                  (6.18).



    Figure 6.16 can be easily used to determine the pressure at the edge of a footing
or can be used to determine the pressure under the center of the footing as described
below. The values of m and n must be calculated. The value m is defined as the
width of the loaded area (x) divided by the depth to where the vertical stress in-
crease (␴z) is to be calculated. The value n is defined as the length of the loaded
area ( y) divided by the depth (z). The chart is entered with the value of n and upon
intersecting the desired m curve, the influence value (I) is then obtained from the
vertical axis. As indicated in Fig. 6.16, vertical stress increase (␴z) is then calculated
as the loaded area pressure (qo) times the influence value (I). Figure 6.16 can also
be used to determine the vertical stress increase (␴z) below the center of a rectan-
gular loaded area. In this case, the rectangular loaded area would be divided into
four parts and then Fig. 6.16 would be used to find the stress increase below the
corner of one of the parts. By multiplying this stress by 4 (i.e., 4 parts), the vertical
stress increase (␴z) below the center of the total loaded area is obtained. This type
of analysis is possible because of the principle of superposition for elastic materials.
To find the vertical stress increase (␴z) outside the loaded area, additional rectan-
gular areas can be added and subtracted as needed in order to model the loading
condition.
    Figure 6.17 presents a chart for determining the change in vertical stress beneath
a uniformly loaded circular area. Figure 6.18 shows a Newmark (1942) chart, which
can be used to determine the vertical stress increase (␴z) beneath a uniformly loaded
area of any shape. There are numerous influence charts, each having a different
influence value. Note that the chart in Fig. 6.18 has an influence value (I) of 0.005.
The first step is to draw the loaded area onto the chart, using a scale where AB
                           SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                  6.49




        FIGURE 6.15 Pressure bulb beneath square footing and strip footing. The
        curves indicate the values of ⌬␴v/qo beneath the footings, where qo ⫽ uniform
        footing pressure (Note: applicable only along the line ab from center to edge of
        base). (From J. E. Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Analysis and Design,’’ 3d ed., McGraw-
        Hill Publishing Co., New York. Reproduced with permission of McGraw-Hill,
        Inc.)




equals the depth z. The center of the chart must correspond to the point where the
increase in vertical stress (␴z) is desired. The increase in vertical stress (␴z) is then
calculated as: ␴z ⫽ qoIN where qo ⫽ applied stress from the irregular area, I ⫽
influence value (0.005 for Fig. 6.18), and N ⫽ number of blocks within the irregular
shaped area plotted on Fig. 6.18. When the value of N is being obtained, portions
of blocks are also counted. Note that the entire procedure must be repeated if the
increase in vertical stress (␴z) is needed at a different depth.
6.50                                    SECTION SIX




         FIGURE 6.16 Chart for calculating the increase in vertical stress beneath the
         corner of a uniformly loaded rectangular area. (From NAVFAC DM-7.1, 1982,
         Reproduced from R. D. Holtz and W. D. Kovacs, ‘‘An Introduction to Geotech-
         nical Engineering,’’ Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ.)



6.5     SETTLEMENT ANALYSES

Settlement can be defined as the permanent downward displacement of the foun-
dation. There are two basic types of settlement, as follows:


6.5.1   Settlement Due Directly to the Weight of the Structure

The first type of settlement is directly caused by the weight of the structure. For
example, the weight of a building may cause compression of an underlying sand
deposit (Art. 6.5.7) or consolidation of an underlying clay layer (Art. 6.5.6). Often
the settlement analysis is based on the actual dead load of the structure. The dead
load is defined as the structural weight due to beams, columns, floors, roofs, and
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                 6.51




        FIGURE 6.17 Chart for calculating the increase in vertical stress beneath a
        uniformly loaded circular area. (From NAVFAC DM-7.1, 1982, Reproduced from
        R. D. Holtz and W. D. Kovacs, ‘‘An Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering,’’
        Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ.)



other fixed members. The dead load does not include nonstructural items. Live
loads are defined as the weight of nonstructural members, such as furniture, oc-
cupants, inventory, and snow. Live loads can also result in settlement of the struc-
ture. For example, if the proposed structure is a library, then the actual weight of
the books (a live load) should be included in the settlement analyses. Likewise, for
a proposed warehouse, it may be appropriate to include the actual weight of antic-
ipated stored items in the settlement analyses. In other projects where the live loads
represent a significant part of the loading, such as large electrical transmission
towers that will be subjected to wind loads, the live load (wind) may also be
included in the settlement analysis. Considerable experience and judgment are re-
quired to determine the load that is to be used in the settlement analyses.


6.5.2   Settlement Due to Secondary Influences

The second basic type of settlement of a building is caused by secondary influence,
which may develop at a time long after the completion of the structure. This type
of settlement is not directly caused by the weight of the structure. For example, the
foundation may settle as water infiltrates the ground and causes unstable soils to
collapse (i.e., collapsible soil, Art. 6.5.5). The foundation may also settle due to
yielding of adjacent excavations or the collapse of limestone cavities or under-
ground mines and tunnels. Other causes of settlement that would be included in
this category are natural disasters, such as settlement caused by earthquakes or
undermining of the foundation from floods.
   Subsidence is usually defined as a sinking down of a large area of the ground
surface. Subsidence could be caused by the extraction of oil or groundwater that
6.52                                      SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.18 Newmark chart for calculating the increase in vertical stress beneath
       a uniformly loaded area of any shape. (From N. M. Newmark, ‘‘Influence Charts for
       Computation of Stresses in Elastic Foundations,’’ Univ. Illinois Expt. Sta. Bull. 338.
       Reproduced from J. E. Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Analysis and Design,’’ 3d ed., McGraw-
       Hill Publishing Co., New York.)
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                              6.53


leads to a compression of the underlying porous soil or rock structure. Since sub-
sidence is due to a secondary influence (extraction of oil or groundwater), its effect
on the structure would be included in the second basic type of settlement.


6.5.3   Foundation Design Parameters
Determining the settlement of the structure is one of the primary obligations of the
geotechnical engineer. In general, three parameters are required: maximum total
settlement ( ␳max), maximum differential settlement (⌬), and rate of settlement. An-
other parameter that may be useful in the design of the foundation is the maximum
angular distortion (␦ / L), defined as the differential settlement between two points
divided by the distance between them. Figure 6.19 illustrates the maximum total
settlement ( ␳max), maximum differential settlement (⌬), and maximum angular dis-
tortion (␦ / L) of a foundation. Note in Fig. 6.19 that the maximum angular distortion
(␦ / L) does not necessarily occur at the location of maximum differential settlement
(⌬).


6.5.4   Allowable Settlement

The allowable settlement is defined as the acceptable amount of settlement of the
structure and it usually includes a factor of safety. The allowable settlement depends
on many factors, including the following (D. P. Coduto, ‘‘Foundation Design, Prin-
ciples and Practices,’’ Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.):
   The Type of Construction. For example, wood-frame buildings with wood sid-
   ing would be much more tolerant than unreinforced brick buildings.




          FIGURE 6.19 Diagram illustrating the definitions of maximum total set-
          tlement ( ␳max), maximum differential settlement (⌬), and maximum angular
          distortion (␦ / L).
6.54                                          SECTION SIX


   The Use of the Structure. Even small cracks in a house might be considered
   unacceptable, whereas much larger cracks in an industrial building might not
   even be noticed.
   The Presence of Sensitive Finishes. Tile or other sensitive finishes are much
   less tolerant of movements.
   The Rigidity of the Structure. If a footing beneath part of a very rigid structure
   settles more than the others, the structure will transfer some of the load away
   from the footing. However, footings beneath flexible structures must settle much
   more before any significant load transfer occurs. Therefore, a rigid structure will
   have less differential settlement than a flexible one.
   Aesthetic and Serviceability Requirements. The allowable settlement for most
   structures, especially buildings, will be governed by aesthetic and serviceability
   requirements, not structural requirements. Unsightly cracks, jamming doors and
   windows, and other similar problems will develop long before the integrity of
   the structure is in danger.

    Another example of allowable settlements for buildings is Table 6.13, where the
allowable foundation displacement has been divided into three categories: total set-
tlement, tilting, and differential movement. Table 6.13 indicates that those structures
that are more flexible (such as simple steel frame buildings) or have more rigid



TABLE 6.13 Allowable Settlement

  Type of movement                           Limiting factor                       Maximum settlement
                            Drainage                                              15–30 cm (6–12 in)
                            Access                                                30–60 cm (12–24 in)
                            Probability of nonuniform settlement:
Total settlement
                              Masonry walled structure                            2.5–5 cm (1–2 in)
                              Framed structures                                   5–10 cm (2–4 in)
                              Smokestacks, silos, mats                            8–30 cm (3–12 in)
                            Stability against overturning                         Depends on H and W
                            Tilting of smokestacks, towers                        0.004 L
                            Rolling of trucks, etc.                               0.01 L
                            Stacking of goods                                     0.01 L
Tilting
                            Machine operation—cotton loom                         0.003 L
                            Machine operation—turbogenerator                      0.0002 L
                            Crane rails                                           0.003 L
                            Drainage of floors                                    0.01–0.02 L
                            High continuous brick walls                           0.0005–0.001 L
                            One-story brick mill building, wall cracking          0.001–0.002 L
                            Plaster cracking (gypsum)                             0.001 L
Differential movement       Reinforced concrete building frame                    0.0025–0.004 L
                            Reinforced concrete building curtain walls            0.003 L
                            Steel frame, continuous                               0.002 L
                            Simple steel frame                                    0.005 L
     L ⫽ distance between adjacent columns that settle different amounts, or between any two points that
settle differently. Higher values are for regular settlements and more tolerant structures. Lower values are
for irregular settlement and critical structures. H ⫽ height and W ⫽ width of structure.
     Source: G. F. Sowers, ‘‘Shallow Foundations,’’ ch. 6 of ‘‘Foundation Engineerings,’’ ed. G. A. Leon-
ards, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York.
                            SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                   6.55


foundations (such as mat foundations) can sustain larger values of total settlement
and differential movement.


6.5.5   Collapsible Soil

Collapsible soil can be defined as soil that is susceptible to a large and sudden
reduction in volume upon wetting. Collapsible soil usually has a low dry density
and low moisture content. Such soil can withstand a large applied vertical stress
with a small compression, but then experience much larger settlements after wetting,
with no increase in vertical pressure. Collapsible soil falls within the second basic
category of settlement, which is settlement of the structure due to secondary influ-
ences.
   In the southwestern United States, collapsible soil is probably the most common
cause of settlement. The category of collapsible soil would include the settlement
of debris, uncontrolled fill, deep fill, or natural soil, such as alluvium or colluvium.
In general, there has been an increase in damage due to collapsible soil, probably
because of the lack of available land in many urban areas. This causes development
of marginal land, which may contain deposits of dumped fill or deposits of natural
collapsible soil. Also, substantial grading can be required to develop level building
pads, which results in more areas having deep fill.
   The oedometer (also known as a consolidometer) is the primary laboratory
equipment used to study the settlement behavior of soil. The oedometer test should
only be performed on undisturbed soil specimens, or in the case of studies of fill
behavior, on specimens compacted to anticipated field and moisture conditions.
Figures 6.20 and 6.21 present the results of a collapse test performed on a soil




        FIGURE 6.20 Laboratory collapse test results for a silty sand. The soil was loaded
        in the oedometer to a pressure of 144 kPa and then inundated with distilled water.
6.56                                   SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.21 Laboratory collapse test results for a silty sand. This plot shows
       the vertical deformation versus time after the soil specimen was inundated with
       distilled water.




specimen by using the laboratory oedometer equipment. The soil specimen was
loaded in the oedometer to a vertical pressure of 144 kPa (3000 psf) and then
inundated with distilled water. Figure 6.20 shows the load-settlement behavior of
the soil specimen, and Fig. 6.21 shows the amount of vertical deformation (collapse)
as a function of time after inundation. The percent collapse is defined as the change
in height of the soil specimen after inundation divided by the initial height of the
soil specimen.
   There are many different methods for dealing with collapsible soil. If there is a
shallow deposit of natural collapsible soil, the deposit can be removed and recom-
pacted during the grading of the site. In some cases, the soil can be densified (such
as by compaction grouting) to reduce the collapse potential of the soil. Another
method for dealing with collapsible soil is to flood the building footprint or force
water into the collapsible soil stratum by using wells. As the wetting front moves
through the ground, the collapsible soil will densify and reach an equilibrium state.
Flooding or forcing water into collapsible soil should not be performed if there are
adjacent buildings, due to the possibility of damaging these structures. Also, after
the completion of the flooding process, subsurface exploration and laboratory test-
ing should be performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the process.
   There are also foundation options that can be used for sites containing collaps-
ible soil. A deep foundation system, which derives support from strata below the
collapsible soil, could be constructed. Also, post-tensioned foundations or mat slabs
can be designed and installed to resist the larger anticipated settlement from the
collapsible soil.
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.57


6.5.6   Settlement of Cohesive and Organic Soils

Cohesive and organic soil can be susceptible to a large amount of settlement from
structural loads. It is usually the direct weight of the structure that causes settlement
of the cohesive or organic soil. The settlement of saturated clay or organic soil can
have three different components: immediate (also known as ‘‘initial settlement’’),
primary consolidation, and secondary compression.

Immediate Settlement. In most situations, surface loading causes both vertical and
horizontal strains. This is referred to as two- or three-dimensional loading. Imme-
diate settlement is due to undrained shear deformations, or in some cases contained
plastic flow, caused by the two- or three-dimensional loading. Common examples
of three-dimensional loading are from square footings and round storage tanks.
Many different methods are available to determine the amount of immediate settle-
ment for two- or three-dimensional loadings. Examples include field plate load tests,
equations based on the theory of elasticity, and the stress path method (see R. W.
Day, ‘‘Geotechnical and Foundation Engineering: Design and Construction,’’ Mc-
Graw-Hill Publishing Co., New York).

Primary Consolidation. The increase in vertical pressure due to the weight of the
structure constructed on top of saturated soft clays and organic soil will initially be
carried by the pore water in the soil. This increase in pore water pressure is known
as an excess pore water pressure (ue). The excess pore water pressure will decrease
with time as water slowly flows out of the cohesive soil. This flow of water from
cohesive soil (which has a low permeability) as the excess pore water pressures
slowly dissipate is known as primary consolidation, or simply consolidation. As
the water slowly flows from the cohesive soil, the structure settles as the load is
transferred to the soil particle skeleton, thereby increasing the effective stress of
the soil. Consolidation is a time-dependent process that may take many years to
complete.
     Based on the stress history of saturated cohesive soils, they are considered to
be either underconsolidated, normally consolidated, or overconsolidated. The over-
consolidation ratio (OCR) is used to describe the stress history of cohesive soil,
and it is defined as: OCR ⫽ ␴ vm⬘ / ␴ ⬘vo , where: ␴ ⬘vm or ␴ p⬘ ⫽ maximum past pressure
(␴ ⬘vm), also known as the preconsolidation pressure (␴ p⬘ ), which is equal to the
highest previous vertical effective stress that the cohesive soil was subjected to and
consolidated under, and ␴ ⬘vo or ␴ v⬘ ⫽ existing vertical effective stress. In terms of
the stress history of a cohesive soil, there are three possible conditions:

1. Underconsolidated (OCR ⬍ 1). A saturated cohesive soil is considered under-
   consolidated if the soil is not fully consolidated under the existing overburden
   pressure and excess pore water pressures (ue) exist within the soil. Undercon-
   solidation occurs in areas where a cohesive soil is being deposited very rapidly
   and not enough time has elapsed for the soil to consolidate under its own weight.
2. Normally Consolidated (OCR ⫽ 1). A saturated cohesive soil is considered
   normally consolidated if it has never been subjected to an effective stress greater
   than the existing overburden pressure and if the deposit is completely consoli-
   dated under the existing overburden pressure.
3. Overconsolidated or Preconsolidated (OCR ⬎ 1): A saturated cohesive soil is
   considered overconsolidated if it has been subjected in the past to a vertical
6.58                                    SECTION SIX


   effective stress greater than the existing vertical effective stress. An example of
   a situation that creates an overconsolidated soil is where a thick overburden
   layer of soil has been removed by erosion over time. Other mechanisms, such
   as changes in groundwater elevation and changes in soil structure, can create an
   overconsolidated soil.
    For structures constructed on top of saturated cohesive soil, determining the
overconsolidation ratio of the soil is very important in the settlement analysis. For
example, if the cohesive soil is underconsolidated, then considerable settlement due
to continued consolidation owing to the soil’s own weight as well as the applied
structural load would be expected. On the other hand, if the cohesive soil is highly
overconsolidated, then a load can often be applied to the cohesive soil without
significant settlement.
    The oedometer apparatus is used to determine the consolidation properties of
saturated cohesive soil. The typical testing procedure consists of placing an undis-
turbed specimen within the apparatus, applying a vertical seating pressure to the
laterally confined specimen, and then submerging the specimen in distilled water.
The specimen is then subjected to an incremental increase in vertical stress, with
each pressure remaining on the specimen for a period of 24 hr. Plotting the vertical
stress versus void ratio of the soil often yields a plot similar to Fig. 6.22. The plot




       FIGURE 6.22 Example of a consolidation curve. The Casagrande construction
       technique for determining the maximum past pressure is also shown on this figure.
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.59


is known as the consolidation curve and consists of two important segments, the
recompression curve (defined by the recompression index Cr) and the virgin con-
solidation curve (defined by the compression index Cc). Figure 6.22 also illustrates
the Casagrande construction technique, which can be used to determine the maxi-
mum past pressure (␴ ⬘vm).
    Using the calculated values of Cr and Cc , the primary consolidation settlement
(sc) due to an increase in load (⌬␴v) can be determined from the following equa-
tions:
1. For underconsolidated soil (OCR ⬍ 1):
                                     Ho      ␴ ⬘ ⫹ ⌬␴ ⬘v ⫹ ⌬␴v
                         sc ⫽ Cc          log vo                                (6.19)
                                   1 ⫹ eo          ␴ ⬘vo

2. For normally consolidated soil (OCR ⫽ 1):
                                         Ho      ␴ ⬘ ⫹ ⌬␴v
                             sc ⫽ Cc          log vo                            (6.20)
                                       1 ⫹ eo        ␴ ⬘vo

3. For overconsolidated soil (OCR ⬎ 1):
   Case I: ␴ ⬘vo ⫹ ⌬␴v ⱕ ␴ vm
                           ⬘

                                         Ho      ␴ ⬘ ⫹ ⌬␴v
                             sc ⫽ Cr          log vo                            (6.21)
                                       1 ⫹ eo        ␴ ⬘vo
   Case II: ␴ vo
              ⬘ ⫹ ⌬␴v ⬎ ␴ vm
                          ⬘

                             Ho      ␴⬘         Ho      ␴ ⬘ ⫹ ⌬␴v
                 sc ⫽ Cr          log vm ⫹ Cc        log vo                     (6.22)
                           1 ⫹ eo    ␴ ⬘vo    1 ⫹ eo        ␴ ⬘vm
   where sc ⫽ settlement due to primary consolidation caused by an increase in
               load
        Cc ⫽ compression index, obtained from the virgin consolidation curve
               (Fig. 6.22)
        Cr ⫽ recompression index, obtained from the recompression portion of
               the consolidation curve (Fig. 6.22)
        Ho ⫽ initial thickness of the in-situ saturated cohesive soil layer
          eo ⫽ initial void ratio of the in-situ saturated cohesive soil layer
       ␴ ⬘vo ⫽ initial vertical effective stress of the in-situ soil (see Art. 6.4.1)
      ⌬␴ ⬘v ⫽ for an underconsolidated soil (this represents the increase in vertical
               effective stress that will occur as the cohesive soil consolidates under
               its own weight)
       ␴ ⬘vm ⫽ maximum past pressure, also known as the preconsolidation pressure
               (␴ ⬘p), which is obtained from the consolidation curve using the Cas-
               agrande construction technique (see Fig. 6.22)
       ⌬␴v ⫽ increase in load, typically due to the construction of a building or
               the construction of a fill layer at ground surface
   The value of ⌬␴v (also known as ␴z) can be obtained from stress distribution
theory as discussed in Art. 6.4.2. Note that a drop in the groundwater table or a
reduction in pore water pressure can also result in an increase in load on the co-
hesive soil.
6.60                                 SECTION SIX


   For overconsolidated soil, there are two possible cases that can be used to cal-
culate the amount of settlement. The first case occurs when the existing vertical
effective stress (␴ ⬘vo ) plus the increase in vertical stress (⌬␴v) due to the proposed
building weight does not exceed the maximum past pressure (␴ ⬘vm). For this first
case, there will only be recompression of the cohesive soil.
   For the second case, the sum of the existing vertical effective stress (␴ ⬘vo) plus
the increase in vertical stress (⌬␴v) due to the proposed building weight exceeds
the maximum past pressure (␴ ⬘vm ). For the second case, there will be virgin con-
solidation of the cohesive soil. Given the same cohesive soil and identical field
conditions, the settlement due to the second case will be significantly more than
the first case.
   As previously mentioned, primary consolidation is a time-dependent process that
can take many years to complete. The rate of consolidation can be estimated using
the Terzaghi theory of consolidation (see K. Terzaghi and R. B. Peck, ‘‘Soil Me-
chanics in Engineering Practice,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York):

Secondary Compression. The final component of settlement is due to secondary
compression, which is that part of the settlement that occurs after essentially all of
the excess pore water pressures have dissipated (i.e., settlement that occurs at con-
stant effective stress). The usual assumption is that secondary compression does not
start until after primary consolidation is complete. The amount of secondary com-
pression is often neglected because it is rather small compared to the primary
consolidation settlement. However, secondary compression can constitute a major
part of the total settlement for peat or other highly organic soil (see R. D. Holtz
and W. D. Kovacs, ‘‘An Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering,’’ Prentice-Hall,
Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ).
    The final calculation for estimating the maximum settlement ( ␳max) of the in-
situ cohesive soil would be to add together the three components of settlement, or:
                                  ␳max ⫽ si ⫹ sc ⫹ ss                            (6.23)
where ␳max   ⫽   maximum settlement over the life of the structure
        si   ⫽   immediate settlement
        sc   ⫽   primary consolidation settlement
        ss   ⫽   secondary compression settlement


6.5.7   Settlement of Granular Soil

A major difference between saturated cohesive soil and granular soil is that the
settlement of cohesionless soil is not time dependent. Because of the generally high
permeability of granular soil, the settlement usually occurs as the load is applied
during the construction of the building. Many different methods can be used to
determine the settlement of granular soil, such as plate load tests, laboratory testing
of undisturbed soil samples, equations based on the theory of elasticity, and em-
pirical correlations. For example, Fig. 6.23 shows a chart that presents an empirical
correlation between the measured N value (obtained from the Standard Penetration
Test, see Art. 6.2.4) and the allowable soil pressure (tsf) that will produce a settle-
ment of the footing of 1 in (2.5 cm).
    As an example of the use of Fig. 6.23, suppose a site contains a sand deposit
and the proposed structure can be subjected to a maximum settlement ( ␳max) of
1.0 in (2.5 cm). If the measured N value from the Standard Penetration Test ⫽ 10
and the width of the proposed footings ⫽ 5 ft (1.5 m), then the allowable soil
pressure ⫽ 1 tsf (100 kPa).
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.61




             FIGURE 6.23 Allowable soil bearing pressures for footings on
             sand based on the Standard Penetration Test. (From K. Terzaghi and
             R. B. Peck, ‘‘Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice,’’ 2d ed., John
             Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York. Reprinted with permission of John
             Wiley & Sons, Inc.)


   For measured N values other than those for which the curves are drawn in Fig.
6.23, the allowable soil pressure can be obtained by linear interpolation between
curves. According to Terzaghi and Peck, if all of the footings are proportioned in
accordance with the allowable soil pressure corresponding to Fig. 6.23, then the
maximum settlement ( ␳max) of the foundation should not exceed 1 in (2.5 cm) and
the maximum differential settlement (⌬) should not exceed 0.75 in (2 cm). Figure
6.23 was developed for the groundwater table located at a depth equal to or greater
than a depth of 2B below the bottom of the footing. For conditions of a high
groundwater table close to the bottom of the shallow foundation, the values obtained
from Fig. 6.23 should be reduced by 50%.


6.6   BEARING CAPACITY ANALYSES

A bearing capacity failure is defined as a foundation failure that occurs when the
shear stresses in the soil exceed the shear strength of the soil. Bearing capacity
6.62                                     SECTION SIX


failures of foundations can be grouped into three categories (A. B. Vesić, ‘‘Bearing
Capacity of Deep Foundations in Sand,’’ Highway Research Record, no. 39):

1. General Shear (Fig. 6.24). As shown in Fig. 6.24, a general shear failure in-
   volves total rupture of the underlying soil. There is a continuous shear failure
   of the soil (solid lines) from below the footing to the ground surface. When the
   load is plotted versus settlement of the footing, there is a distinct load at which
   the foundation fails (solid circle), and this is designated Qult. The value of Qult
   divided by the width (B) and length (L) of the footing is considered to be the
   ‘‘ultimate bearing capacity’’ (qult) of the footing. The ultimate bearing capacity
   has been defined as the bearing stress that causes a sudden catastrophic failure
   of the foundation. Note in Fig. 6.24 that a general shear failure ruptures and
   pushes up the soil on both sides of the footing. For actual failures it the field,
   the soil is often pushed up on only one side of the footing with subsequent
   tilting of the structure. A general shear failure occurs for soils that are in a dense
   or hard state.
2. Punching Shear (Fig. 6.25). As shown in Fig. 6.25, a punching shear failure
   does not develop the distinct shear surfaces associated with a general shear
   failure. For punching shear, the soil outside the loaded area remains relatively
   uninvolved and there is minimal movement of soil on both sides of the footing.




       FIGURE 6.24 General shear foundation failure for soil in a dense or hard state.
       (Adapted from A. B. Vesić, ‘‘Bearing Capacity of Deep Foundations in Sand,’’ High-
       way Research Record, no. 39.)
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.63




                 FIGURE 6.25 Punching shear foundation failure for soil
                 in a loose or soft state. (Adapted from A. B. Vesić, ‘‘Bearing
                 Capacity of Deep Foundations in Sand,’’ Highway Re-
                 search Record, no. 39.)



   The process of deformation of the footing involves compression of soil directly
   below the footing as well as the vertical shearing of soil around the footing
   perimeter. As shown in Fig. 6.25, the load settlement curve does not have a
   dramatic break, and for punching shear, the bearing capacity is often defined as
   the first major nonlinearity in the load-settlement curve (open circle). A punching
   shear failure occurs for soils that are in a loose or soft state.
3. Local Shear Failure (Fig. 6.26). As shown in Fig. 6.26, local shear failure
   involves rupture of the soil only immediately below the footing. There is soil
   bulging on both sides of the footing, but the bulging is not as significant as in
   general shear. Local shear failure can be considered as a transitional phase be-
   tween general shear and punching shear. Because of the transitional nature of
   local shear failure, the bearing capacity could be defined as the first major non-
   linearity in the load-settlement curve (open circle) or at the point where the
   settlement rapidly increases (solid circle). A local shear failure occurs for soils
   that have a medium density or firm state.

   The documented cases of bearing capacity failures indicate that usually the fol-
lowing three factors (separately or in combination) are the cause of the failure:
6.64                                      SECTION SIX




        FIGURE 6.26 Local shear foundation failure, which is a transitional phase be-
        tween general shear and punching shear failures. (Adapted from A. B. Vesić, ‘‘Bear-
        ing Capacity of Deep Foundations in Sand,’’ Highway Research Record, no. 39.)



1. There was an overestimation of the shear strength of the underlying soil.
2. The actual structural load at the time of the bearing capacity failure was greater
   than that assumed during the design phase.
3. The site was altered, such as the construction of an adjacent excavation, which
   resulted in a reduction in support and a bearing capacity failure.
   A famous case of a bearing capacity failure is the Transcona grain elevator,
located at Transcona, Manitoba, Canada, near Winnipeg. Figure 6.27 shows the
October 1913 failure of the grain elevator. At the time of failure, the grain elevator
was essentially fully loaded. The foundation had been constructed on clay that was
described as a stiff clay. Note in Fig. 6.27 that the soil has been pushed up on only
one side of the foundation, with subsequent tilting of the structure.


6.6.1   Bearing Capacity for Shallow Foundations

As indicated in Table 6.2, common types of shallow foundations include spread
footings for isolated columns, combined footings for supporting the load from more
than one structural unit, strip footings for walls, and mats or raft foundations con-
structed at or near ground surface. Shallow footings often have an embedment that
is less than the footing width.
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                             6.65




FIGURE 6.27 Transcona grain elevator bearing capacity failure.


Bearing Capacity Equation. The most commonly used bearing capacity equation
is the equation developed by Terzaghi (‘‘Theoretical Soil Mechanics,’’ John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York). For a uniform vertical loading of a strip footing, Terzaghi
assumed a general shear failure (Fig. 6.24) in order to develop the following bearing
capacity equation:
                                Qult
                       qult ⫽        ⫽ cNc ⫹ 1⁄2 ␥tBN␥ ⫹ ␥tDƒ Nq                   (6.24)
                                BL
where      qult ⫽ ultimate bearing capacity for a strip footing
           Qult ⫽ vertical load causing a general shear failure of the underlying soil
                  (Fig. 6.24)
             B ⫽ width of the strip footing
             L ⫽ length of the strip footing
            ␥t ⫽ total unit weight of the soil
            Dƒ ⫽ vertical distance from the ground surface to the bottom of the
                  strip footing
             c ⫽ cohesion of the soil underlying the strip footing
Nc, N␥, and Nq ⫽ dimensionless bearing capacity factors
    In order to calculate the allowable bearing pressure (qall), the following equation
is used: qall ⫽ qult / F, where qall ⫽ allowable bearing pressure, qult ⫽ ultimate bearing
capacity from Eq. (6.24), and F ⫽ factor of safety (typically F ⫽ 3). This allowable
bearing pressure often has to be reduced in order to prevent excessive settlement
of the foundation. In addition, building codes often list allowable bearing pressures
versus soil or rock types, such as Table 6.14, which presents the allowable bearing
pressures (qall) from the ‘‘Uniform Building Code’’ (1997).
6.66                                            SECTION SIX


TABLE 6.14 Allowable Bearing Pressures

                                                         Allowable bearing            Maximum allowable
                 Material type                               pressurea                 bearing pressureb
Massive crystalline bedrock                             4,000   psf   (200 kPa)      12,000   psf   (600   kPa)
Sedimentary and foliated rock                           2,000   psf   (100 kPa)       6,000   psf   (300   kPa)
Gravel and sandy gravel (GW, GP)                        2,000   psf   (100 kPa)       6,000   psf   (300   kPa)
Nonplastic soil: sands, silts, and NP silt              1,500   psf   (75 kPa)        4,500   psf   (220   kPa)
  (GM, SW, SP, SM)c
Plastic soil: silts and clays (ML, MH, SC,              1,000 psf (50 kPa)             3,000 psf (150 kPa)d
  CL, CH)c
    a
       Minimum footing width and embedment depth equals 1 ft (0.3 m).
    b
       An increase of 20% of the allowable bearing pressure is allowed for each additional foot (0.3 m) of
width or depth up to the maximum allowable bearing pressures listed in Column 3. An exception is plastic
soil, see note d.
     c
       Group symbols from Table 6.8.
     d
       No increase in the allowable bearing pressure is allowed for an increase in width of the footing.
     For dense or stiff soils, allowable bearing values in this table are generally conservative. For very loose
or very soft soils, the allowable bearing values may be too high.
     Source: Data from ‘‘Uniform Building Code’’ (1997)



   There are many charts, graphs, and figures that present bearing capacity factors
developed by different engineers and researchers based on varying assumptions. For
example, Fig. 6.28 presents bearing capacity factors Nc, N␥, and Nq , which auto-
matically incorporate allowance for punching and local shear failure. Another ex-
ample is Fig. 6.29, which presents bearing capacity factors that have not been
adjusted for punching or local shear failure. Figure 6.29 also presents the bearing
capacity equations for square, rectangular, and circular footings. The equations for
granular soil (i.e., cohesionless soil, c ⫽ 0) and for a total stress analysis for co-
hesive soil (i.e., ␾ ⫽ 0 and c ⫽ su) are also shown in Fig. 6.29.

Other Footing Loads. In addition to the vertical load acting on the footing, it
may also be subjected to a lateral load. A common procedure is to treat lateral
loads separately and resist the lateral loads by using the soil pressure acting on the
sides of the footing (passive pressure) and the frictional resistance along the bottom
of the footing.
   It is always desirable to design and construct shallow footings so that the vertical
load is applied at the center of gravity of the footing. For combined footings that
carry more than one vertical load, the combined footing should be designed and
constructed so that the vertical loads are symmetric. There may be design situations
where the footing is subjected to a moment, such as where there is a fixed-end
connection between the building frame and the footing. This moment can be rep-
resented by a load Q that is offset a certain distance (known as the eccentricity)
from the center of gravity of the footing. For other projects, there may be property
line constraints and the load must be offset a certain distance (eccentricity) from
the center of gravity of the footing. Because an eccentrically loaded footing will
create a higher bearing pressure under one side as compared to the opposite side,
one approach is to evaluate the actual pressure distribution beneath the footing. The
usual procedure is to assume a rigid footing (hence linear pressure distribution) and
use the section modulus (1⁄6B2) in order to calculate the largest and lowest bearing
pressure. For a footing having a width B, the largest (q ⬘) and lowest (q ⴖ) bearing
pressures are as follows:
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                              6.67




           FIGURE 6.28 Bearing capacity factors N␥ and Nq, which automati-
           cally incorporate allowance for punching and local shear failure. (Re-
           produced from R. B. Peck, W. E. Hanson, and T. H. Thornburn, ‘‘Foun-
           dation Engineering,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, reproduced
           with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)



                              Q(B ⫹ 6e)                Q(B ⫺ 6e)
                       q⬘ ⫽                     qⴖ ⫽                                (6.25)
                                 B2                       B2

where q ⬘ ⫽ largest bearing pressure underneath the footing, which is located along
            the same side of the footing as the eccentricity
      q ⴖ ⫽ lowest bearing pressure underneath the footing, which is located at the
            opposite side of the footing
      Q ⫽ load applied to the footing (kN per linear m of footing length or lb
            per linear ft of footing length)
6.68                                      SECTION SIX




FIGURE 6.29 Bearing capacity factors N␥ , Nq, and Nc, which do not include allowance for
punching or local shear failure. (Note: for local or punching shear of loose sands or soft clays,
the value of ␾ to be used in this figure ⫽ tan⫺1 (0.67 tan ␾) and the cohesion used in the bearing
capacity equation ⫽ 0.67 c). (Reproduced from NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.)
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.69


        e ⫽ eccentricity of the load Q ; i.e., the lateral distance from Q to the center
            of gravity of the footing
        B ⫽ width of the footing
    A usual requirement is that the load (Q ) must be located within the middle 1⁄3
of the footing. The above equations are only valid for this condition. The value of
q ⬘ must not exceed the allowable bearing pressure (qall).
    For dense or stiff soils, allowable bearing values in Table 6.14 are generally
conservative. For very loose or very soft soils, the allowable bearing values in Table
6.14 may be too high.


6.6.2   Bearing Capacity for Deep Foundations in Granular Soil

Deep foundations are used when the upper soil stratum is too soft, weak, or com-
pressible to support the foundation loads. Deep foundations are also used when
there is a possibility of the undermining of the foundation. For example, bridge
piers are often founded on deep foundations to prevent a loss of support due to
flood conditions which could cause river bottom scour. The most common types of
deep foundations are piles and piers that support individual footings or mat foun-
dations (Table 6.2). Piles are defined as relatively long, slender, column-like mem-
bers often made of steel, concrete, or wood that are either driven into place or cast-
in-place in predrilled holes. Common types of piles are as follows:
   Batter Pile. A pile driven in at an angle inclined to the vertical to provide high
   resistance to lateral loads.
   End-Bearing Pile. A pile whose support capacity is derived principally from
   the resistance of the foundation material on which the pile tip rests. End-bearing
   piles are often used when a soft upper layer is underlain by a dense or hard
   stratum. If the upper soft layer should settle, the pile could be subjected to down-
   drag forces, and the pile must be designed to resist these soil-induced forces.
   Friction Pile. A pile whose support capacity is derived principally from the
   resistance of the soil friction and / or adhesion mobilized along the side of the
   pile. Friction piles are often used in soft clays where the end-bearing resistance
   is small because of punching shear at the pile tip.
   Combined End-Bearing and Friction Pile. A pile that derives its support ca-
   pacity from combined end-bearing resistance developed at the pile tip and fric-
   tional and / or adhesion resistance on the pile perimeter.
   A pier is defined as a deep foundation system, similar to a cast-in-place pile,
that consists of a column-like reinforced concrete member. Piers are often of large
enough diameter to enable down-hole inspection. Piers are also commonly referred
to as drilled shafts, bored piles, or drilled caissons.
   Many other methods are available for forming deep foundation elements. Ex-
amples include earth stabilization columns, such as (NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982):
   Mixed-in-Place Piles. A mixed-in-place soil-cement or soil-lime pile.
   Vibro-Replacement Stone Columns. Vibroflotation or other method is used to
   make a cylindrical, vertical hole that is filled with compacted gravel or crushed
   rock.
6.70                                 SECTION SIX


   Grouted Stone Columns. Similar to the above but includes filling voids with
   bentonite-cement or water-sand-bentonite cement mixtures.
   Concrete Vibro Columns. Similar to stone columns, but concrete is used instead
   of gravel.
   Several different items are used in the design and construction of piles, includ-
ing:
   Engineering Analysis. Based on the results of subsurface exploration and lab-
   oratory testing, the bearing capacity of the deep foundation can be calculated in
   a similar manner to the previous section on shallow foundations. This section
   will describe the engineering analyses for deep foundations in granular and co-
   hesive soil.
   Field Load Tests. Prior to the construction of the foundation, a pile or pier
   could be load tested in the field to determine its carrying capacity. Because of
   the uncertainties in the design of piles based on engineering analyses, pile load
   tests are common. The pile load test can often result in a more economical
   foundation than one based solely on engineering analyses.
   Application of Pile Driving Resistance. Often the pile driving resistance (i.e.,
   blows per ft) is recorded as the pile is driven into place. When the anticipated
   bearing layer is encountered, the driving resistance (blows per ft) should sub-
   stantially increase.
   Specifications and Experience. Other factors that should be considered in the
   deep foundation design include governing building code or agency requirements
   and local experience.

End Bearing Pile for Granular Soil. For an end bearing pile or pier, the bearing
capacity equation can be used to determine the ultimate bearing capacity ( qult).
When we compare the second and third term in Eq. (6.24), the value of B (width
of pile) is much less than the embedment depth (Dƒ ) of the pile. Therefore, the
second term in Eq. (6.24) can be neglected. Assuming granular soil (c ⫽ 0), Eq.
(6.24) reduces to the following:
                                    Qp
                          qult ⫽        ⫽ ␥t Dƒ Nq ⫽ ␴ ⬘v Nq                 (6.26)
                                   area
where qult ⫽ the ultimate bearing capacity of the end-bearing pile or pier
      Q p ⫽ point resistance force
     area ⫽ pile tip area (B2 in the case of a square pile and ␲ R 2 in the case of
              a round pile)
       ␴ ⬘v ⫽ vertical effective stress at the pile tip
       Nq ⫽ dimensionless bearing capacity factor
   For drilled piers or piles placed in predrilled holes, the value of Nq can be
obtained from Fig. 6.28 or 6.29 based on the friction angle (␾) of the granular soil
located at the pile tip. However, for driven piles, the values of Nq listed in Figs.
6.28 and 6.29 are generally too conservative. Figure 6.30 presents a chart that
provides the bearing capacity factor Nq from several different sources. Note in Fig.
6.30 that at ␾ ⫽ 30⬚, Nq varies from about 30 to 150, while at ␾ ⫽ 40⬚, Nq varies
from about 100 to 1000. This is a tremendous variation in Nq values and is related
to the different approaches used by the various researchers, where in some cases
                           SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                     6.71




      FIGURE 6.30 Bearing capacity factor Nq as recommended by various researchers
      for deep foundations. (Originally from A. S. Vesić, ‘‘Ultimate Loads and Settlements
      of Deep Foundations in Sand,’’ Duke University, Durham, NC.)



the basis of the relationship shown in Fig. 6.30 is theoretical and in other cases the
relationship is based on analysis of field data such as pile load tests. There is a
general belief that the bearing capacity factor Nq is higher for driven piles than for
shallow foundations. One reason for a higher Nq value is the effect of driving the
pile, which displaces and densifies the cohesionless soil at the bottom of the pile.
The densification could be due to both the physical process of displacing the soil
6.72                                   SECTION SIX


and the driving vibrations. These actions would tend to increase the friction angle
of the granular soil in the vicinity of the driven pile. Large-diameter piles would
tend to displace and densify more soil than smaller-diameter piles.

Friction Pile for Granular Soil. As the name implies, a friction pile develops its
load carrying capacity due to the frictional resistance between the granular soil and
the pile perimeter. Piles subjected to vertical uplift forces would be designed as
friction piles because there would be no end-bearing resistance as the pile is pulled
from the ground.
    Based on a linear increase in frictional resistance with confining pressure, the
average ultimate frictional capacity (qult) can be calculated as follows:
                                 Qs
                   qult ⫽                ⫽ ␴ ⬘h tan ␾w ⫽ ␴ v⬘ k tan ␾w           (6.27)
                            surface area
where    qult ⫽ the average ultimate frictional capacity for the pile or pier
          Qs ⫽ ultimate skin friction resistance force
Surface area ⫽ perimeter surface area of the pile, which is equal to 4DL for a
                 square pile and ␲DL for a round pile (D ⫽ diameter or width of
                 pile and L ⫽ length of pile)
          ␴ h⬘ ⫽ average horizontal effective stress over the length of the pile or pier
          ␴ ⬘v ⫽ average vertical effective stress over the length of the pile or pier
           k ⫽ dimensionless parameter equal to ␴ ⬘h divided by ␴ v⬘ (because of the
                 densification of the granular soil associated with driven displace-
                 ment piles, values of k between 1 and 2 are often assumed)
         ␾w ⫽ friction angle between the cohesionless soil and the perimeter of
                 the pile or pier (degrees)
Commonly used friction angles are ␾w ⫽ 3⁄4␾ for wood and concrete piles and
␾w ⫽ 20⬚ for steel piles.
    In Eq. (6.27), the term ␴ ⬘h tan ␾w equals the shear strength (␶ƒ) between the pile
or pier surface and the granular soil. This term is identical to Eq. (6.9) (with c ⬘ ⫽
0), that is, ␶ƒ ⫽ ␴ ⬘n tan ␾⬘. Thus, the frictional resistance force (Qs) in Eq. (6.27)
is equal to the perimeter surface area times the shear strength of the soil at the pile
or pier surface.

Combined End-Bearing and Friction Pile in Granular Soil. Piles and piers sub-
jected to vertical compressive loads and embedded in a deposit of granular soil are
usually treated in the design analysis as combined end-bearing and friction piles or
piers. This is because the pile or pier can develop substantial load-carrying capacity
from both end-bearing and frictional resistance. To calculate the ultimate pile or
pier capacity for a condition of combined end-bearing and friction, the value of Qp
from Eq. (6.26) is added to the value of Qs from Eq. (6.27). Usually the ultimate
capacity is divided by a factor of safety of 3 in order to calculate the allowable
pile or pier load.

Pile Groups in Granular Soil. The previous discussion dealt with the load ca-
pacity of a single pile in cohesionless soil. Usually pile groups are used to support
the foundation elements, such as a group of piles supporting a pile cap or a mat
slab. In loose sand and gravel deposits, the load-carrying capacity of each pile in
the group may be greater than that of a single pile because of the densification
effect due to driving the piles. Because of this densification effect, the load capacity
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.73


of the group is often taken as the load capacity of a single pile times the number
of piles in the group. An exception would be a situation where a weak layer un-
derlies the cohesionless soil. In this case, group action of the piles could cause
them to punch through the granular soil and into the weaker layer or cause excessive
settlement of the weak layer located below the pile tips.
    In order to determine the settlement of the strata underlying the pile group, the
2:1 approximation (see Art. 6.4.2) can be used to determine the increase in vertical
stress (⌬␴v) for those soil layers located below the pile tip. If the piles in the group
are principally end-bearing, then the 2:1 approximation starts at the tip of the piles
(L ⫽ bottom length of the pile group, B ⫽ width of the pile group, and z ⫽ depth
below the tip of the piles, see Eq. 6.16). If the pile group develops its load-carrying
capacity principally through side friction, then the 2:1 approximation starts at a
depth of 2⁄3D, where D ⫽ depth of the pile group.


6.6.3   Bearing Capacity for Deep Foundations in Cohesive Soil

The load-carrying capacity of piles and piers in cohesive soil is more complex than
the analysis for granular soil. Some of the factors that may need to be considered
in the analysis are as follows (AASHTO, ‘‘Standard Specifications for Bridges,’’
16th ed., American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials,
Washington, DC):

• A lower load-carrying capacity of a pile in a pile group as compared to that of
  a single pile.
• The settlement of the underlying cohesive soil due to the load of the pile group.
• The effects of driving piles on adjacent structures or slopes. The ground will
  often heave around piles driven into soft and saturated cohesive soil.
• The increase in load on the pile due to negative skin friction (i.e., down-drag
  loads) from consolidating soil.
• The effects of uplift loads from expansive and swelling clays.
• The reduction in shear strength of the cohesive soil due to construction tech-
  niques, such as the disturbance of sensitive clays or development of excess pore
  water pressures during the driving of the pile. There is often an increase in load-
  carrying capacity of a pile after it has been driven into a soft and saturated clay
  deposit. This increase with time is known as freeze or setup and is caused pri-
  marily by the dissipation of excess pore water pressures.
• The influence of fluctuations in the elevation of the groundwater table on the
  load-carrying capacity when analyzed in terms of effective stresses.

Total Stress Analysis. The ultimate load capacity of a single pile or pier in co-
hesive soil is often determined by performing a total stress analysis. This is because
the critical load on the pile, such as from wind or earthquake loads, is a short-term
loading condition and thus the undrained shear strength of the cohesive soil will
govern. The total stress analysis for a single pile or pier in cohesive soil typically
is based on the undrained shear strength (su ⫽ c) of the cohesive soil.
   The ultimate load capacity of the pile or pier in cohesive soil would equal the
sum of the ultimate end-bearing and ultimate side adhesion components. Using the
Terzaghi bearing capacity equation (Eq. 6.24), the ultimate load capacity (Qult) of
a single pile or pier in cohesive soil equals:
6.74                                    SECTION SIX


                      Qult ⫽ end bearing ⫹ side adhesion

                           ⫽ cNc (area of tip) ⫹ cA (surface area)

or                    Q ult ⫽ c9(␲R 2) ⫹ cA(2␲RL)

                           ⫽ 9c␲R 2 ⫹ 2␲cARL                                               (6.28)
where Qult ⫽ ultimate load capacity of the pile or pier
        c ⫽ cohesion of the cohesive soil at the pile tip (because it is a total stress
             analysis, the undrained shear strength (su ⫽ c) is often used)
        R ⫽ radius of the pile or pier
        L ⫽ length of the embedment of the pile
       cA ⫽ adhesion between the cohesive soil and pile or pier perimeter
   For Eq. (6.28), the usual assumption is Nc ⫽ 9. Figure 6.31 can be used to
determine the value of the adhesion (cA) for different types of piles and cohesive
soil conditions. If the pile or pier is subjected to an uplift force, then the first term
in Eq. (6.28) is set equal to zero. Usually the ultimate capacity is divided by a
factor of safety of 3 in order to calculate the allowable pile or pier load.

Pile Groups. The bearing capacity of pile groups in cohesive soils is normally
less than the sum of individual piles in the group, and this reduction in group




       FIGURE 6.31 Ultimate capacity for a single pile or pier in cohesive soil. (Repro-
       duced from NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.)
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                               6.75


capacity must be considered in the analysis. The ‘‘group efficiency’’ is defined as
the ratio of the ultimate load capacity of each pile in the group to the ultimate load
capacity of a single isolated pile. If the spacing between piles in the group is at a
distance that is greater than about 7 times the pile diameter, then the group effi-
ciency is equal to 1 (i.e., no reduction in pile capacity for group action). The group
efficiency decreases as the piles become closer together in the pile group. Figure
6.32 can be used to determine the ultimate load capacity of a pile group in cohesive
soil.
    Similar to pile groups in cohesionless soil, the settlement of the strata underlying
the pile group can be evaluated by using the 2:1 approximation (see Art. 6.4.2) to
calculate the increase in vertical stress (⌬␴v) for those soil layers located below the
pile tip. If the piles in the group develop their load-carrying capacity principally
by end-bearing in cohesive soil, then the 2:1 approximation starts at the tip of the
piles (L ⫽ bottom length of the pile group, B ⫽ width of the pile group, and z ⫽
depth below the tip of the piles, see Eq. 6.16). If the pile group develops its load-
carrying capacity principally through cohesive soil adhesion along the pile perim-
eter, then the 2:1 approximation starts at a depth of 2⁄3 D, where D ⫽ depth of the
pile group.




      FIGURE 6.32 Ultimate capacity of a pile group in cohesive soil. (Developed by
      Whitaker, reproduced from NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.)
6.76                                      SECTION SIX


6.7    RETAINING WALLS

A retaining wall is defined as a structure whose primary purpose is to provide
lateral support for soil or rock. In some cases, such as basement walls and certain
types of bridge abutments, it may also support vertical loads. The more common
types of retaining walls are shown in Fig. 6.33 and include gravity walls, canti-
levered walls, counterfort walls, and crib walls. Gravity retaining walls are rou-
tinely built of plain concrete or stone, and the wall depends primarily on its massive




       FIGURE 6.33 Common types of retaining walls: (a) Gravity walls of stone,
       brick, or plain concrete. Weight provides overturning and sliding stability; (b) can-
       tilevered wall; (c) counterfort, or buttressed, wall. If backfill covers counterforts,
       the wall is termed a counterfort retaining wall; (d ) crib wall; (e) semigravity wall
       (often steel reinforcement is used); ( f ) bridge abutment. (Reproduced from J. E.
       Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Analysis and Design,’’ 3d ed., McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.,
       New York, with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                             6.77


weight to resist failure from overturning and sliding. Counterfort walls consist of
a footing, a wall stem, and intermittent vertical ribs (called counterforts) that tie
the footing and wall stem together. Crib walls consist of interlocking concrete mem-
bers that form cells which are then filled with compacted soil.
   Granular soils (sands or gravels) are the standard recommendation for backfill
material. There are several reasons for this recommendation:
1. Predictable Behavior. Import granular backfill generally has a more predictable
   behavior in terms of earth pressure exerted on the wall. If silts or clays are used
   as backfill material, expansive soil-related forces could be generated by these
   soil types.
2. Drainage System. To prevent the build-up of hydrostatic water pressure on the
   retaining wall, a drainage system is often constructed at the heel of the wall.
   This system will be more effective if highly permeable granular soil is used as
   backfill.
3. Frost Action. In cold climates, the formation of ice lenses in the backfill soil
   can cause so much lateral movement that the retaining wall will become un-
   usable. Backfill soil consisting of granular soil and the installation of a drainage
   system at the heel of the wall will help to protect the wall from frost action.


6.7.1   Retaining Wall Analyses

Figure 6.34 shows various types of retaining walls and the soil pressures acting on
the walls. Three types of soil pressures act on a retaining wall: (1) active earth
pressure, which is exerted on the back side of the wall, (2) passive earth pressure,
which acts on the front of the retaining wall footing, and (3) bearing pressure,
which acts on the bottom of the retaining wall footing. These three pressures are
individually discussed below.

Active Earth Pressure. In order to calculate the active earth pressure resultant
force ( PA), in kN per linear meter of wall or pounds per linear foot of wall, the
following equation is used for granular backfill:

                                    PA ⫽ 1⁄2kA␥t H2                              (6.29)
where kA ⫽ active earth pressure coefficient
      ␥t ⫽ total unit weight of the granular backfill
      H ⫽ height over which the active earth pressure acts as defined in Fig. 6.34a
    In its simplest form, the active earth pressure coefficient (kA) is equal to:

                                kA ⫽ tan2(45⬚ ⫺ 1⁄2␾)                            (6.30)
where ␾ ⫽ friction angle of the granular backfill. Equation (6.30) is known as the
active Rankine state, after the British engineer Rankine, who in 1857 obtained this
relationship. Equation (6.30) is valid only for the simple case of a retaining wall
that has a vertical rear face, no friction between the rear wall face and backfill soil,
and the backfill ground surface is horizontal. For retaining walls that do not meet
these requirements, the active earth pressure coefficient (kA) for Eq. (6.29) is often
determined using the Coulomb equation (see Fig. 6.35). Often the wall friction is
neglected (␦ ⫽ 0⬚), but if it is included in the analysis, typical values are ␦ ⫽ 3⁄4␾
6.78                                SECTION SIX




                        FIGURE 6.34a Gravity and semigravity
                        retaining walls. (From NAVFAC DM-7.2,
                        1982.)



for the wall friction between granular soil and wood or concrete walls and ␦ ⫽ 20⬚
for the wall friction between granular soil and steel walls such as sheet-pile walls.
Note in Fig. 6.35 that when wall friction angle ␦ is used in the analysis, the active
earth pressure resultant force ( PA) is inclined at an angle equal to ␦.
   Additional important details concerning the active earth pressure are as follows:
1. Sufficient Movement. There must be sufficient movement of the retaining wall
   in order to develop the active earth pressure of the backfill. For dense granular
   soil, the amount of wall translation to reach the active earth pressure state is
   usually very small (i.e., to reach active state, wall translation ⱖ 0.0005 H, where
   H ⫽ height of wall).
2. Triangular Distribution. As shown in Figs. 6.34 and 6.35, the active earth
   pressure is a triangular distribution and thus the active earth pressure resultant
   force ( PA) is located at a distance equal to 1⁄3H above the base of the wall.
3. Surcharge Pressure. If there is a uniform surcharge pressure (Q ) acting upon
   the entire ground surface behind the wall, then there would be an additional
   horizontal pressure exerted upon the retaining wall equal to the product of kA
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                          6.79




                       FIGURE 6.34b Cantilever and counterfort
                       retaining walls. (From NAVFAC DM-7.2,
                       1982.)



   times Q. Thus, the resultant force ( P2), in kN per linear m of wall or lb per
   linear ft of wall, acting on the retaining wall due to the surcharge (Q ) is equal
   to P2 ⫽ QHkA, where Q ⫽ uniform vertical surcharge acting upon the entire
   ground surface behind the retaining wall, kA ⫽ active earth pressure coefficient
   (Eq. (6.30) or Fig. 6.35), and H ⫽ height of the retaining wall. Because this
   pressure acting upon the retaining wall is uniform, the resultant force ( P2) is
   located at midheight of the retaining wall.
4. Active Wedge: The active wedge is defined as that zone of soil involved in the
   development of the active earth pressures upon the wall. This active wedge must
   move laterally in order to develop the active earth pressures. It is important that
   building footings or other load-carrying members are not supported by the active
   wedge, or else they will be subjected to lateral movement. The active wedge is
   inclined at an angle of 45⬚ ⫹ ␾ / 2 from the horizontal.

Passive Earth Pressure. As shown in Fig. 6.34, the passive earth pressure is
developed along the front side of the footing. Passive pressure is developed when
the wall footing moves laterally into the soil and a passive wedge is developed. In
6.80                                  SECTION SIX




          FIGURE 6.34c Design analysis for retaining walls shown in Figs. 6.34a
          and 6.34b. (From NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.)



order to calculate the passive resultant force ( Pp), the following equation is used
assuming that there is cohesionless soil in front of the wall footing:

                                    Pp ⫽ 1⁄2kp␥t D 2                              (6.31)
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.81




          FIGURE 6.35 Coulomb’s earth pressure (kA) equation. (From NAVFAC
          DM-7.2, 1982.)



where Pp ⫽ passive resultant force in kN per linear m of wall or lb per linear ft of
           wall
      kp ⫽ passive earth pressure coefficient
      ␥t ⫽ total unit weight of the soil located in front of the wall footing
      D ⫽ depth of the wall footing (vertical distance from the ground surface in
           front of the retaining wall to the bottom of the footing)

   The passive earth pressure coefficient (kp) is equal to:

                                kp ⫽ tan2(45⬚ ⫹ 1⁄2␾)                           (6.32)

where ␾ ⫽ friction angle of the soil in front of the wall footing. Equation (6.32)
is known as the passive Rankine state. In order to develop passive pressure, the
wall footing must more laterally into the soil. The wall translation to reach the
passive state is at least twice that required to reach the active earth pressure state.
Usually it is desirable to limit the amount of wall translation by applying a reduction
factor to the passive pressure. A commonly used reduction factor is 2.0. The soil
engineer routinely reduces the passive pressure by 1⁄2 (reduction factor ⫽ 2.0) and
then refers to the value as the allowable passive pressure.

Footing Bearing Pressure. In order to calculate the footing bearing pressure, the
first step is to sum the vertical loads, such as the wall and footing weights. The
vertical loads can be represented by a single resultant vertical force, per linear m
or ft of wall, that is offset by a distance (eccentricity) from the toe of the footing.
This can then be converted to a pressure distribution by using Eq. (6.25). The largest
bearing pressure is routinely at the toe of the footing and it should not exceed the
allowable bearing pressure (Art. 6.6.1).
6.82                                 SECTION SIX


Retaining Wall Analyses. Once the active earth pressure resultant force ( PA) and
the passive resultant force ( Pp) have been calculated, the design analysis is per-
formed as indicated in Fig. 6.34c. The retaining wall analysis includes determining
the resultant location of the forces (i.e., calculate d, which should be within the
middle third of the footing), the factor of safety for overturning, and the factor of
safety for sliding. The adhesion (ca) between the bottom of the footing and the
underlying soil is often ignored for the sliding analysis.


6.7.2   Restrained Retaining Walls

As mentioned in the previous article, in order for the active wedge to be developed,
there must be sufficient movement of the retaining wall. There are many cases
where movement of the retaining wall is restricted. Examples include massive
bridge abutments, rigid basement walls, and retaining walls that are anchored in
nonyielding rock. These cases are often described as restrained retaining walls.
   In order to determine the earth pressure acting on a restrained retaining wall,
Eq. (6.29) can be utilized where the coefficient of earth pressure at rest (k0) is
substituted for kA. A common value of k0 for granular soil that is used for restrained
retaining walls is 0.5. Restrained retaining walls are especially susceptible to higher
earth pressures induced by heavy compaction equipment, and extra care must be
taken during the compaction of backfill for restrained retaining walls.


6.7.3   Mechanically Stabilized Earth Retaining Walls

Mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls (also known as MSE retaining
walls) are typically composed of strip- or grid-type (geosynthetic) reinforcement.
Because they are often more economical to construct than conventional concrete
retaining walls, mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls have become very
popular in the past decade. A mechanically stabilized earth retaining wall is com-
posed of three elements: (1) wall facing material, (2) soil reinforcement, such as
strip- or grid-type reinforcement, and (3) compacted fill between the soil reinforce-
ment.
    The design analysis for a mechanically stabilized earth retaining wall is more
complex than for a cantilevered retaining wall. For a mechanically stabilized earth
retaining wall, both the internal and external stability must be checked.

External Stability. The analysis for the external stability is similar to that for a
gravity retaining wall. For example, Figs. 6.36 and 6.37 present the design analysis
for external stability for a level backfill condition and a sloping backfill condition.
In both Figs. 6.36 and 6.37, the zone of mechanically stabilized earth mass is treated
in a similar fashion as a massive gravity retaining wall. The following analyses
must be performed:
1. Allowable bearing pressure: the bearing pressure due to the reinforced soil mass
   must not exceed the allowable bearing pressure.
2. Factor of safety of sliding: the reinforced soil mass must have an adequate factor
   of safety for sliding.
3. Factor of safety of overturning; the reinforced soil mass must have an adequate
   factor of safety for overturning about Point O.
                   SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                 6.83




FIGURE 6.36 Design analysis for mechanically stabilized earth retaining wall
having horizontal backfill. (Adapted from AASHTO, ‘‘Standard Specifications for
Highway Bridges,’’ 16th ed., American Association of State Highway and Trans-
portation Officials, Washington, DC.)




  FIGURE 6.37 Design analysis for mechanically stabilized earth retaining
  wall having sloping backfill. (Adapted from AASHTO, ‘‘Standard Specifi-
  cations for Highway Bridges,’’ 16th ed., American Association of State High-
  way and Transportation Officials, Washington, DC.)
6.84                                 SECTION SIX


4. Resultant of vertical forces: the resultant of the vertical forces N must be within
   the middle 1⁄3 of the base of the reinforced soil mass.
5. Stability of reinforced soil mass: the stability of the entire reinforced soil mass
   (i.e., shear failure below the bottom of the wall) would have to be checked.

   Note in Figure 6.36 that two forces (P1 and P2) are shown acting on the rein-
forced soil mass. The first force ( P1) is determined from the standard active earth
pressure resultant equation (i.e., Eq. 6.29). The second force ( P2) is due to a uni-
form surcharge (Q) applied to the entire ground surface behind the mechanically
stabilized earth retaining wall. If the wall does not have a surcharge, then P2 is
equal to zero.
   Figure 6.37 presents the active earth pressure force for an inclined slope behind
the retaining wall. Note in Fig. 6.37 that the friction (␦) of the soil along the back
side of the reinforced soil mass has been included in the analysis. The value of kA
would be obtained from Coulomb’s earth pressure equation (Fig. 6.35). As a con-
servative approach, the friction angle (␦) can be assumed to be equal to zero and
then PH ⫽ PA. Note in both Figs. 6.36 and 6.37 that the minimum width of the
reinforced soil mass must be at least 7⁄10 the height of the reinforced soil mass.

Internal Stability. To check the stability of the mechanically stabilized zone, a
slope stability analysis can be performed where the soil reinforcement is modeled
as horizontal forces equivalent to its allowable tensile resistance. In addition to
calculation of the factor of safety, the pull-out resistance of the reinforcement along
the slip surface should also be checked.
   The analysis of mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls is based on active
earth pressures. It is assumed that the wall will move enough to develop the active
wedge. As with concrete retaining walls, it is important that building footings or
other load carrying members are not supported by the mechanically stabilized earth
retaining wall and the active wedge, or else they could be subjected to lateral
movement.


6.7.4   Sheet Pile Walls

Sheet pile retaining walls are widely used for waterfront construction and consist
of interlocking members that are driven into place. Individual sheet piles come in
many different sizes and shapes. Sheet piles have an interlocking joint that enables
the individual segments to be connected together to form a solid wall.
   Many different types of design methods are used for sheet pile walls. Figure
6.38 shows the most common type of design method. In Fig. 6.38, the term H
represents the unsupported face of the sheet pile wall. As indicated in Fig. 6.38,
this sheet pile wall is being used as a waterfront retaining structure and the level
of water in front of the wall is at the same elevation as the groundwater table
elevation behind the wall. For highly permeable soil, such as clean sand and gravel,
this often occurs because the water can quickly flow underneath the wall in order
to equalize the water levels.
   In Fig. 6.38, the term D represents that portion of the sheet pile wall that is
anchored in soil. Also shown in Fig. 6.38 is a force designated as Ap. This represents
a restraining force on the sheet pile wall due to the construction of a tieback, such
as by using a rod that has a grouted end or is attached to an anchor block. Tieback
anchors are often used in sheet pile wall construction in order to reduce the bending
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                          6.85




                   FIGURE 6.38 Earth pressure diagram for design of
                   sheet pile wall. (From NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.)



moments in the sheet pile. When tieback anchors are used, the sheet pile wall is
typically referred to as an anchored bulkhead, while if no tiebacks are utilized,
the wall is called a cantilevered sheet pile wall.
   Sheet pile walls tend to be relatively flexible. Thus, as indicated in Fig. 6.38,
the design is based on active and passive earth pressures. For this analysis, a unit
length (1 m or 1 ft) of sheet pile wall is assumed. The soil behind the wall is
assumed to exert an active earth pressure on the sheet pile wall. At the groundwater
table (Point A), the active earth pressure is equal to kA␥td1, where kA ⫽ active earth
pressure coefficient from Eq. (6.30) (the friction between the sheet pile wall and
the soil is usually neglected in the design analysis), ␥t ⫽ total unit weight of the
soil above the groundwater table, and d1 ⫽ depth from the ground surface to the
groundwater table. At Point B in Fig. 6.38, the active earth pressure equals kA␥td1
⫹ kA␥bd2, where ␥b ⫽ buoyant unit weight of the soil below the groundwater table
and d2 ⫽ depth from the groundwater table to the bottom of the sheet pile wall.
For a sheet pile wall having assumed values of H and D (see Fig. 6.38), and using
the calculated values of active earth pressure at Points A and B, the active earth
pressure resultant force ( PA), in kN per linear m of wall or lb per linear foot of
wall, can be calculated.
   The soil in front of the wall is assumed to exert a passive earth pressure on the
sheet pile wall. The passive earth pressure at Point C in Fig. 6.38 is equal to kp␥bD,
where the passive earth pressure coefficient (kp) can be calculated from Eq. (6.32).
Similar to the analysis of cantilever retaining walls, if it is desirable to limit the
amount of sheet pile wall translation, then a reduction factor can be applied to the
passive pressure. Once the allowable passive pressure is known at Point C, the
passive resultant force (Pp) can be readily calculated. As an alternative solution for
the passive pressure, Eq. (6.31) can be used to calculate Pp with the buoyant unit
6.86                                 SECTION SIX


weight (␥b) substituted for the total unit weight (␥t ) and the depth D as shown in
Fig. 6.38.
    Note that a water pressure has not been included in the analysis. This is because
the water level is the same on both sides of the wall and water pressure cancels
itself out. However, if the water level was higher behind than in front of the wall,
then water pressure forces would be generated behind the wall.
    The design of sheet pile walls requires the following analyses: (1) evaluation of
the earth pressure resultant forces PA and Pp as previously described, (2) determi-
nation of the required depth D of piling penetration, (3) calculation of the maximum
bending moment (Mmax) which is used to determine the maximum stress in the
sheet pile, and (4) selection of the appropriate piling type, size, and construction
details.
    A typical design process is to assume a depth D (Fig. 6.38) and then calculate
the factor of safety for toe failure (i.e., toe kick-out) by the summation of moments
at the tieback anchor (Point D). The factor of safety is defined as the moment due
to the passive force divided by the moment due to the active force. Values of
acceptable factor of safety for toe failure are 2 to 3.
    Once the depth D of the sheet pile wall is known, the anchor pull ( Ap) must be
calculated. The anchor pull is determined by the summation of forces in the hori-
zontal direction, or: Ap ⫽ PA ⫺ Pp / F, where PA and Pp are the resultant active and
passive forces and F is the factor of safety that was obtained from the toe failure
analysis. Based on the earth pressure diagram (Fig. 6.38) and the calculated value
of Ap, elementary structural mechanics can be used to determine the maximum
moment in the sheet pile wall. The maximum moment divided by the section mod-
ulus can then be compared with the allowable design stresses.


6.7.5   Temporary Retaining Walls

Temporary retaining walls are often used during construction, such as for the sup-
port of the sides of an excavation that is made below-grade in order to construct
the building foundation. If the temporary retaining wall has the ability to develop
the active wedge, then the basic active earth pressure principles described in the
previous sections can be used for the design of the temporary retaining walls.
    Especially in urban areas, movement of the temporary retaining wall may have
to be restricted to prevent damage to adjacent property. If movement of the retaining
wall is restricted, the earth pressures will typically be between the active (kA) and
at-rest (k0) values.
    For some projects, the temporary retaining wall may be constructed of sheeting
(such as sheet piles) that are supported by horizontal braces, also known as struts.
Near or at the top of the temporary retaining wall, the struts restrict movement of
the retaining wall and prevent the development of the active wedge. Because of
this inability of the retaining wall to deform at the top, earth pressures near the top
of the wall are in excess of the active (kA) pressures. At the bottom of the wall, the
soil is usually able to deform into the excavation, which results in a reduction in
earth pressure, and the earth pressures at the bottom of the excavation tend to be
constant or even decrease as shown in Fig. 6.39.
    The earth pressure distributions shown in Fig. 6.39 were developed from actual
measurements of the forces in struts during the construction of braced excavations.
In Fig. 6.39, case a shows the earth pressure distribution for braced excavations in
sand and cases b and c show the earth pressure distribution for clays. In Fig. 6.39,
                    SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                 6.87




FIGURE 6.39 Earth pressure distribution on temporary braced walls. (From
NAVFAC DM-7.2 1982, originally developed by K. Terzaghi and R. B. Peck, ‘‘Soil
Mechanics in Engineering Practice,’’ 2d ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.)
6.88                                 SECTION SIX


the distance H represents the depth of the excavation (i.e., the height of the exposed
wall surface). The earth pressure distribution is applied over the exposed height (H)
of the wall surface with the earth pressures transferred from the wall sheeting to
the struts (the struts are labeled with the forces F1, F2, etc.).
   Any surcharge pressures, such as surcharge pressures on the ground surface
adjacent the excavation, must be added to the pressure distributions shown in Fig.
6.39. In addition, if the sand deposit has a groundwater table that is above the level
of the bottom of the excavation, then water pressures must be added to the case a
pressure distribution shown in Fig. 6.39.
   Because the excavations are temporary (i.e., short-term condition), the undrained
shear strength (su ⫽ c) is used for the analysis of the earth pressure distributions
for clay. The earth pressure distributions for clay (i.e., cases b and c) are not valid
for permanent walls or for walls where the groundwater table is above the bottom
of the excavation.



6.8     FOUNDATIONS

This section deals with the selection of the type of foundation. The selection of a
particular type of foundation is often based on a number of factors, such as:

1. Adequate Depth. It must have an adequate depth to prevent frost damage. For
   such foundations as bridge piers, the depth of the foundation must be sufficient
   to prevent undermining by scour.
2. Bearing Capacity Failure. The foundation must be safe against a bearing ca-
   pacity failure (Art. 6.6).
3. Settlement. The foundation must not settle to such an extent that it damages
   the structure (Art. 6.5).
4. Quality. The foundation must be of adequate quality so that it is not subjected
   to deterioration, such as the sulfate attack of concrete footings.
5. Adequate Strength. The foundation must be designed with sufficient strength
   that it does not fracture or break apart under the applied superstructure loads. It
   must also be properly constructed in conformance with the design specifications.
6. Adverse Soil Changes. The foundation must be able to resist long-term adverse
   soil changes. An example is expansive soil (silts and clays), which could expand
   or shrink causing movement of the foundation and damage to the structure.
7. Seismic Forces. The foundation must be able to support the structure during an
   earthquake without excessive settlement or lateral movement.



6.8.1   Shallow Foundations

A shallow foundation is often selected when the structural load will not cause
excessive settlement of the underlying soil layers. In general, shallow foundations
are more economical to construct than deep foundations. Common types of shallow
foundations are listed in Table 6.2 and described below:
                           SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                       6.89


1. Spread Footings, Combined Footings, and Strip Footings. These types of
   shallow foundations are probably the most common types of building founda-
   tions. Examples of these types of footings are shown in Fig. 6.40.
2. Mat Foundation. Examples of mat foundations are shown in Fig. 6.41. Based
   on economic considerations, mat foundations are constructed for the following
   reasons:
   (a) Large Individual Footings. A mat foundation is often constructed when
        the sum of individual footing areas exceeds about one-half of the total foun-
        dation area.
   (b) Cavities or Compressible Lenses. A mat foundation can be used when the
        subsurface exploration indicates that there will be unequal settlement caused
        by small cavities or compressible lenses below the foundation. A mat foun-
        dation would tend to span over the small cavities or weak lenses and create
        a more uniform settlement condition.
   (c) Shallow Settlements. A mat foundation can be recommended when shallow
        settlements predominate and the mat foundation would minimize differential
        settlements.
   (d ) Unequal Distribution of Loads. For some structures, there can be a large
        difference in building loads acting on different areas of the foundation. Con-
        ventional spread footings could be subjected to excessive differential settle-




      FIGURE 6.40 Examples of shallow foundations: (a) combined footing; (b) com-
      bined trapezoidal footing; (c) cantilever or strap footing; (d ) octagonal footing; (e)
      eccentric loaded footing with resultant coincident with area so soil pressure is uni-
      form. (From J. E. Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Analysis and Design,’’ 2d ed., McGraw-Hill
      Publishing Co., New York, with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
6.90                                     SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.41 Examples of mat foundations: (a) Flat plate; (b) plate thickened
       under columns; (c) beam-and-slab; (d ) plate with pedestals; (e) basement walls as
       part of mat. (From J. E. Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Analysis and Design,’’ 2d ed., Mc-
       Graw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)



        ment, but a mat foundation would tend to distribute the unequal building
        loads and reduce the differential settlements.
   (e) Hydrostatic Uplift. When the foundation will be subjected to hydrostatic
        uplift due to a high groundwater table, a mat foundation could be used to
        resist the uplift forces.
3. Post-Tensioned Slabs-on-Grade. Post-tensioned slabs-on-grade are common in
   southern California and other parts of the United States. They are an economical
   foundation type when there is no ground freezing or the depth of frost penetra-
   tion is low. The most common uses of post-tensioned slabs-on-grade are to resist
   expansive soil forces or when the projected differential settlement exceeds the
   tolerable value for a conventional (lightly reinforced) slabs-on-grade. For ex-
   ample, post-tensioned slabs-on-grade are frequently recommended if the pro-
   jected differential settlement is expected to exceed 2 cm (0.75 in). Installation
   and field inspection procedures for post-tensioned slabs-on-grade have been pre-
   pared by the Post-Tensioning Institute (‘‘Design and Construction of Post-
   tensioned Slabs-on-Ground,’’ 2d ed., Phoenix). Post-tensioned slabs-on-grade
   consists of concrete with embedded steel tendons that are encased in thick plastic
   sheaths. The plastic sheath prevents the tendon from coming in contact with the
   concrete and permits the tendon to slide within the hardened concrete during
   the tensioning operations. Usually tendons have a dead end (anchoring plate) in
   the perimeter (edge) beam and a stressing end at the opposite perimeter beam
   to enable the tendons to be stressed from one end. The Post-Tensioning Institute
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                            6.91


   (‘‘Design and Construction of Post-tensioned Slabs-on-Ground,’’ 2d ed., Phoe-
   nix) provides typical anchorage details for the tendons.
4. Shallow Foundation Alternatives. If the expected settlement for a proposed
   shallow foundation is too large, then other options for foundation support or soil
   stabilization must be evaluated. Some commonly used alternatives are as follows:
   (a) Grading. Grading operations can be used to remove the compressible soil
        layer and replace it with structural fill. Usually the grading option is eco-
        nomical only if the compressible soil layer is near the ground surface and
        the groundwater table is below the compressible soil layer or the ground-
        water table can be economically lowered.
   (b) Surcharge. If the site contains an underlying compressible cohesive soil
        layer, the site can be surcharged with a fill layer placed at the ground sur-
        face. Vertical drains (such as wick drains or sand drains) can be installed
        in the compressible soil layer to reduce the drainage paths and speed up the
        consolidation process. Once the compressible cohesive soil layer has had
        sufficient consolidation, the fill surcharge layer is removed and the building
        is constructed.
   (c) Densification of Soil. Many different methods can be used to densify loose
        or soft soil. For example, vibro-flotation and dynamic compaction are often
        effective at increasing the density of loose sand deposits. Another option is
        compaction grouting, which consists of intruding a mass of very thick con-
        sistency grout into the soil, which both displaces and compacts the loose
        soil.
   (d ) Floating Foundation. A floating foundation is a special type of deep foun-
        dation where the weight of the structure is balanced by the removal of soil
        and construction of an underground basement.



6.8.2   Deep Foundations

Probably the most common type of deep foundation is the pile foundation. Table
6.15 presents pile type characteristics and uses. Piles can consist of wood (timber),
steel H-sections, precast concrete, cast-in-place concrete, pressure injected concrete,
concrete filled steel pipe piles, and composite type piles. Piles are either driven into
place or installed in predrilled holes. Piles that are driven into place are generally
considered to be low displacement or high displacement, depending on the amount
of soil that must be pushed out of the way as the pile is driven. Examples of low-
displacement piles are steel H-sections and open-ended steel pipe piles that do not
form a soil plug at the end. Examples of high-displacement piles are solid section
piles, such as round timber piles or square precast concrete piles, and steel pipe
piles with a closed end.
   A cast-in-place pile is formed by making a hole in the ground and then filling
the hole with concrete. As shown in Fig. 6.42, in its simplest form, the cast-in-
place pile consists of an uncased hole that is filled with concrete. If the soil tends
to cave into the hole, then a shell-type pile can be installed (see Fig. 6.42). This
consists of driving a steel shell or casing into the ground. The casing may be driven
with a mandrel, which is then removed, and the casing is filled with concrete. In
other cases, the casing can be driven into place and then slowly removed as the
hole is filled with concrete.
   Figure 6.43 shows typical pile configurations.
TABLE 6.15 Typical Pile Characteristics and Uses

                                                                                     Cast-in-place concrete piles       Cast-in-place concrete piles
       Pile type               Timber                            Steel             (shells driven without mandrel)          (shells withdrawn)
Maximum length     35 m (115 ft)                    Practically unlimited          45 m (150 ft)                      36 m (120 ft)
Optimum length     9–20 m (30–65 ft)                12–50 m (40–160 ft)            9–25 m (30–80 ft)                  8–12 m (25–40 ft)
Applicable         ASTM-D25 for piles; PI-54        ASTM-A36 for structural        ACI                                ACIa
  material           for quality of creosote; C1-     sections
  specifications     60 for creosote treatment      ASTM-A1 for rail sections
                     (standards of American
                     Wood Preserves Assoc.)
Recommended        Measured at midpoint of          ƒs ⫽ 65 to 140 MPa (9–20       0.33 ƒ⬘c; 0.4 ƒc⬘ if shell gauge   0.25–0.33ƒ⬘c
  maximum            length: 4–6 MPa (600–900          ksi)                           ⱕ 14; shell stress ⫽ 0.35 ƒy
  stresses           psi) for cedar, western        ƒs ⫽ 0.35–0.5 ƒy                  if thickness of shell ⱖ 3
                     hemlock, Norway pine,                                           mm
                     spruce, and depending on
                     code
                   5–8 MPa (700–1200 psi) for
                     southern pine, Douglas fir,
                     oak cypress, and hickory
Maximum load       270 kN (60 kips)                 Maximum allowable stress ⫻     900 kN (200 kips)                  1300 kN (300 kips)
 for usual                                           cross section
 conditions
Optimum-load       130–225 kN (30–50 kips)          350–1050 kN (80–240 kips)      450–700 kN (100–150 kips)          350–900 kN (80–200 kips)
  range
Disadvantages      Difficult to splice              Vulnerable to corrosion        Hard to splice after concreting    Concrete should be placed in
                   Vulnerable to damage in hard     HP section may be damaged or   Considerable displacement            dry hole
                     driving                          deflected by major                                              More than average dependence
                   Vulnerable to decay unless         obstructions                                                      on quality of workmanship
                     treated, when piles are
                     intermittently submerged
6.92
TABLE 6.15 Typical Pile Characteristics and Uses (Continued)

                                                                                          Cast-in-place concrete piles        Cast-in-place concrete piles
       Pile type               Timber                              Steel                (shells driven without mandrel)           (shells withdrawn)
Advantages         Comparatively low initial cost     Easy to splice                    Can be redriven                     Initial economy
                   Permanently submerged piles        High capacity                     Shell not easily damaged
                     are resistant to decay           Small displacement
                   Easy to handle                     Able to penetrate through light
                                                        obstructions
Remarks            Best suited for friction pile in   Best suited for end bearing on    Best suited for friction piles of   Allowable load on pedestal
                     granular material                  rock                              medium length                       pile is controlled by bearing
                                                      Reduce allowable capacity for                                           capacity of stratum
                                                        corrosive locations                                                   immediately below pile
Typical
  illustrations
6.93
  TABLE 6.15 Typical Pile Characteristics and Uses (Continued)

                                                                                                                Cast in place            Auger placed
                          Concrete filled                                       Precast concrete              (thin shell driven       pressure-injected
       Pile type          steel pipe piles           Composite piles         (including prestressed)           with mandrels)        concrete (grout) piles
  Maximum length Practically unlimited           55 m (180 ft)              30 m (100 ft) for precast   30 m (100 ft) for          9–25 m (30–80 ft)
                                                                            60 m (200 ft) for             straight sections
                                                                              prestressed               12 m (40 ft) for tapered
                                                                                                          sections
  Optimum length     12–36 m (40–120 ft)         18–36 m (60–120 ft)        12–15 m (40–50 ft) for      12–18 m (40–60 ft) for     12–18 m (40–60 ft)
                                                                              precast                     straight
                                                                            18–30 m (60–100 ft) for     5–12 m (16–40 ft) for
                                                                              prestressed                 tapered
  Applicable         ASTM A36 for core           ACI Code 318 for           ASTM A15 reinforcing        ACI                        See ACIa
    material         ASTM A252 for pipe            concrete                   steel
    specifications   ACI Code 318 for            ASTM A36 for               ASTM A82 cold-drawn
                       concrete                    structural section         wire
                                                 ASTM A252 for steel        ACI Code 318 for
                                                   pipe                       concrete
                                                 ASTM D25 for timber
  Recommended        0.40 ƒy reinforcement ⬍     Same as concrete in        0.33ƒ⬘c unless local        0.33 ƒ⬘c; ƒs ⫽ 0.4 ƒy if   0.225–0.4ƒ⬘c
    maximum             205 MPa (30 ksi)           other piles                 building code is less;      shell gauge is ⱕ 14;
    stresses         0.50 ƒy for core ⬍ 175      Same as steel in other        0.4 ƒy for reinforced       use ƒs ⫽ 0.35 ƒy if
                        MPa (25 ksi)               piles                       unless prestressed          shell thickness ⱖ 3
                     0.33 ƒ⬘c for concrete       Same as timber piles for                                  mm
                                                   wood composite
  Maximum load       1800 kN (400 kips)          1800 kN (400 kips)         8500 kN (2000 kips) for     675 kN (150 kips)          700 kN (160 kips)
   for usual           without cores                                          prestressed
   conditions        18,000 kN (4000 kips)                                  900 kN (200 kips) for
                       for large sections with                                precast
                       steel cores
  Optimum-load       700–1100 kN (160–250        250–725 kN (60–160         350–3500 kN (80–800         250–550 kN (60–120         350–550 kN (80–120
    range              kips) without cores         kips)                      kips)                       kips)                      kips)
                     4500–14,000 kN (1000–
                       3100 kips) with cores
6.94
TABLE 6.15 Typical Pile Characteristics and Uses (Continued)

                                                                                                                            Cast in place              Auger placed
                            Concrete filled                                               Precast concrete                (thin shell driven         pressure-injected
       Pile type            steel pipe piles               Composite piles             (including prestressed)             with mandrels)          concrete (grout) piles
Disadvantages         High initial cost               Difficult to attain good        Difficult to handle unless      Difficult to splice after   Dependence on
                      Displacement for closed-          joint between two               prestressed                     concreting                  workmanship
                        end pipe                        materials                     High initial cost               Redriving not               Not suitable in
                                                                                      Considerable                      recommended                 compressible soil
                                                                                        displacement                  Thin shell vulnerable
                                                                                      Prestressed difficult to          during driving
                                                                                        splice                        Considerable
                                                                                                                        displacement
Advantages            Best control during             Considerable length can         High load capacities            Initial economy             Freedom from noise and
                        installation                    be provided at                Corrosion resistance can        Taped sections provide        vibration
                      No displacement for               comparatively low               be attained                      higher bearing           Economy
                        open-end installation           cost                          Hard driving possible              resistance in granular   High skin friction
                      Open-end pipe best                                                                                 stratum                  No splicing
                        against obstructions
                      High load capacitites
                      Easy to splice
Remarks               Provides high bending           The weakest of any              Cylinder piles in               Best suited for medium-     Patented method
                        resistance where                material used shall             particular are suited           load friction piles in
                        unsupported length is           govern allowable                for bending resistance          granular materials
                        loaded laterally                stresses and capacity
Typical
  illustrations




    a
      ACI Committee 543, ‘‘Recommendations for Design, Manufacture, and Installation of Concrete Piles,’’ JACI,
August 1973, October 1974.
    Sources: NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982 and J. E. Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Analysis and Design,’’ 3d ed., McGraw-Hill
Publishing, Co., New York.
    Stresses given for steel piles and shells are for noncorrosive locations. For corrosive locations estimate possible
reduction in steel cross section or provide protection from corrosion.
6.95
6.96                                        SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.42 Common types of cast-in-place concrete piles: (a) Uncased pile;
       (b) Franki uncased-pedestal pile; (c) Franki cased-pedestal pile; (d ) welded or seam-
       less pipe pile; (e) cased pile using a thin sheet shell; ( f ) monotube pile; (g) uniform
       tapered pile; (h) step-tapered pile. (From J. E. Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Analysis and
       Design,’’ 3d ed., McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permission of Mc-
       Graw-Hill, Inc.)



6.9    FOUNDATION EXCAVATIONS

There are many different types of excavations performed during the construction
of a project. For example, soil may be excavated from the cut or borrow area and
then used as fill (see Art. 6.10). Another example is the excavation of a shear key
or buttress that will be used to stabilize a slope or landslide. Other examples of
excavations are as follows:
1. Footing Excavations. This type of service involves measuring the dimension of
   geotechnical elements (such as the depth and width of footings) to make sure
   that they conform to the requirements of the construction plans. This service is
   often performed at the same time as the field observation to confirm bearing
   conditions.
                           SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                 6.97




       FIGURE 6.43 Typical pile configurations. (From J. E. Bowles, ‘‘Foundation Anal-
       ysis and Design,’’ 3d ed., McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permission
       of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)



2. Excavation of Piers. As with the excavation of footings, the geotechnical en-
   gineer may be required to confirm embedment depths and bearing conditions
   for piers. Figure 6.44 presents typical steps in the construction of a drilled pier.
3. Open Excavations. An open excavation is defined as an excavation that has
   stable and unsupported side slopes. Table 6.16 presents a discussion of the gen-
   eral factors that control the excavation stability, and Table 6.17 lists factors that
   control the stability of excavation slopes in some problem soils.
4. Braced Excavations. A braced excavation is defined as an excavation where
   the sides are supported by retaining structures. Figure 6.45 shows common types
   of retaining systems and braced excavations. Table 6.18 lists the design consid-
   erations for braced excavations, and Table 6.19 indicates factors that are involved
   in the choice of a support system for a deep excavation.


6.10   GRADING AND OTHER SITE
       IMPROVEMENT METHODS

Since most building sites start out as raw land, the first step in site construction
work usually involves the grading of the site. Grading is defined as any operation
consisting of excavation, filling, or a combination thereof. A typical grading process
could include some or all of the following:
6.98                                     SECTION SIX




       FIGURE 6.44 Typical steps in the construction of a drilled pier: (a) dry augering
       through self-supporting cohesive soil; (b) augering through water bearing cohesion-
       less soil with aid of slurry; (c) setting the casing.
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                    6.99




     FIGURE 6.44 (d ) dry augering into cohesive soil after sealing; (e) forming a bell.
     (After O’Neill and Reese. Reproduced from R. B. Peck, W. E. Hanson, and T. H.
     Thornburn, ‘‘Foundation Engineering,’’ John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.)
     (Continued )




1. Easements. The first step in the grading operation is to determine the location
   of any on-site utilities and easements. The on-site utilities and easements often
   need protection so that they are not damaged during the grading operation.
2. Clearing, Brushing, and Grubbing. Clearing, brushing, and grubbing are de-
   fined as the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, trees, and similar plant types)
   by mechanical means. It is important that this debris be removed from the site
   and not accidentally placed within the structural fill mass.
3. Cleanouts. This grading process deals with the removal of unsuitable bearing
   material at the site, such as loose or porous alluvium, colluvium, peat, muck,
   and uncompacted fill.
4. Benching (Hillside Areas). Benching is defined as the excavation of relatively
   level steps into earth material on which fill is to be placed.
5. Canyon Subdrain. A subdrain is defined as a pipe and gravel or similar drain-
   age system placed in the alignment of canyons or former drainage channels.
   After placement of the subdrain, structural fill is placed on top of the subdrain.
6. Scarifying and Recompaction. In flat areas that have not been benched, scar-
   ifying and recompaction of the ground surface is performed by compaction
   equipment in order to get a good bond between the in-place material and com-
   pacted fill.
6.100                                        SECTION SIX


TABLE 6.16 General Factors That Control the Stability of the Excavation Slopes

 Construction
   activity                     Objectives                                  Comments
Dewatering         In order to prevent boiling,            Investigate soil compressibility and
                     softening, or heave of the              effect of dewatering on settlement of
                     excavation bottom, reduce               nearby structures; consider
                     lateral pressures on sheeting,          recharging or slurry wall cutoff.
                     reduce seepage pressures on             Examine for presence of lower
                     face of open cut, and                   aquifer and need to dewater. Install
                     eliminate piping of fines               piezometers if needed. Consider
                     through sheeting.                       effects of dewatering in cavity-laden
                                                             limestone. Dewater in advance of
                                                             excavation.
Excavation         Utility trenches, basement              Analyze safe slopes or bracing
  and grading        excavations, and site                   requirements, and effects of stress
  (also see          grading.                                reduction on overconsolidated, soft,
  Art. 6.10)                                                 or swelling soils and shales.
                                                             Consider horizontal and vertical
                                                             movements in adjacent areas due to
                                                             excavation and effect on nearby
                                                             structures. Keep equipment and
                                                             stockpiles a safe distance from the
                                                             top of the excavation.
Excavation         To support vertical excavation          See Art. 6.7 for retaining wall design.
  wall               walls, and to stabilize                 Reduce earth movements and bracing
  construction       trenching in limited space.             stresses, where necessary, by
                                                             installing lagging on front flange of
                                                             soldier pile. Consider effect of
                                                             vibrations due to driving sheet piles
                                                             or soldier piles. Consider dewatering
                                                             requirements as well as wall stability
                                                             in calculating sheeting depth.
                                                             Movement monitoring may be
                                                             warranted.
Blasting           To remove or to facilitate the          Consider the effect of vibrations on
                     removal of rock in the                  settlement or damage to adjacent
                     excavation.                             areas. Design and monitor or require
                                                             the contractor to design and monitor
                                                             blasting in critical areas, and require
                                                             a pre-construction survey of nearby
                                                             structures.
Anchor or          To obtain support system                Major excavations require careful
  strut              stiffness and interaction.             installation and monitoring, e.g., case
  installation                                              anchor holes in collapsible soil,
                                                            measure stress in ties and struts, etc.
    Sources: NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982, Clough and Davidson 1977, and Departments of the Army and the
Air Force 1979. G. W. Clough and R. R. Davidson, ‘‘Effects of Construction on Geotechnical Performance,’’
and Department of the Army and the Air Force, ‘‘Soils and Geology, Procedures for Foundation Design.’’
                             SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                    6.101


TABLE 6.17 Stability of Excavation Slopes in Some Problem Soils

    Topic                                              Discussion
                    The depth and slope of an excavation and groundwater conditions control
                       the overall stability and movements of open excavations. Factors that
                       control the stability of the excavation for different material types are as
                       follows:
                    1. Rock: For rock, stability is controlled by depths and slopes of
                        excavation, particular joint patterns, in-situ stresses, and groundwater
                        conditions.
General             2. Granular Soils: For granular soils, instability usually does not extend
  discussion            significantly below the bottom of the excavation provided that seepage
                        forces are controlled.
                    3. Cohesive Soils: For cohesive soils, stability typically involves side
                        slopes but may also include the materials well below the bottom of the
                        excavation. Instability of the bottom of the excavation, often referred
                        to as bottom heave, is affected by soil type and strength, depth of cut,
                        side slope and / or berm geometry, groundwater conditions, and
                        construction procedures.
Stiff-fissured      Field shear resistance may be less than suggested by laboratory testing.
   clays and          Slope failures may occur progressively and shear strengths are reduced
   shales             to the residual value compatible with relatively large deformations.
                      Some case histories suggest that the long-term performance is
                      controlled by the drained residual friction angle. The most reliable
                      design would involve the use of local experience and recorded
                      observations.
Loess and           Such soils have a strong potential for collapse and erosion of relatively
  other               dry materials upon wetting. Slopes in loess are frequently more stable
  collapsible         when cut vertical to prevent water infiltration. Benches at intervals can
  soil                be used to reduce effective slope angles. Evaluate potential for collapse
                      as described in Art. 6.5.5.
Residual soil       Depending on the weathering profile from the parent rock, residual soil
                      can have a significant local variation in properties. Guidance based on
                      recorded observations provides a prudent basis for design.
Sensitive           Very sensitive and quick clays have a considerable loss of strength upon
  clay                remolding, which could be generated by natural or man-made
                      disturbance. Minimize disturbance and use total stress analysis based
                      on undrained shear strength from unconfined compression tests or field
                      vane tests.
Talus               Talus is characterized by loose aggregation of rock that accumulates at
                      the foot of rock cliffs. Stable slopes are commonly between 1.25:1 to
                      1.75:1 (horizontal:vertical). Instability is often associated with
                      abundance of water, mostly when snow is melting.
Loose sands         Loose sands may settle under blasting vibrations, or liquefy, settle, and
                      lose shear strength if saturated. Such soils are also prone to erosion
                      and piping.
Engineering         Slope stability analyses may be used to evaluate the stability of open
  evaluation          excavations in soils where the behavior of such soils can be reasonably
                      determined by field investigations, laboratory testing, and engineering
                      analysis. As described above, in certain geologic formations stability is
                      controlled by construction procedures, side effects during and after
                      excavation, and inherent geologic planes of weaknesses.
    Sources: NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982 and Clough and Davidson 1977. G. W. Clough and R. R. Davidson,
‘‘Effects of Construction on Geotechnical Performance,’’ and Department of the Army and the Air Force,
‘‘Soils and Geology, Procedures for Foundation Design.’’
6.102                                  SECTION SIX




        FIGURE 6.45 Common types of retaining systems and braced excavations. (From
        NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.)



 7. Cut and Fill Rough Grading Operations. Rough grading operations involve
    the cutting of earth materials from high areas and compaction of fill in low
    areas, in conformance with grading plans. Other activities could be performed
    during rough grading operations, such as:
    (a) Ripping or Blasting of Rock. Large rock fragments can be removed from
         the site or disposed of in windrows.
    (b) Cut-Fill Transition. A cut-fill transition is the location in a building pad
         where on one side the pad has been cut down, exposing natural or rock
         material, while on the other side fill has been placed. One method to deal
         with a cut-fill transition is to over-excavate the cut portion of the pad and
         replace it with compacted fill.
    (c) Slope Stabilization. Examples of slope stabilization using earth materials
         include stabilization fill, buttress fill, drainage buttress, and shear keys.
         Such devices should be equipped with backdrain systems.
    (d ) Fill Slopes. When creating a fill slope, it is often difficult to compact the
         outer edge of the fill mass. Because there is no confining pressure, the soil
                           SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                               6.103


TABLE 6.18 Design Considerations for Braced Excavations

Design factor                                    Comments
Water loads     Often greater than earth loads on an impervious wall. Recommend
                  piezometers during construction to monitor water levels. Should also
                  consider possible lower water pressures as a result of seepage of water
                  through or under the wall. Dewatering can be used to reduce the water
                  loads. Seepage under the wall reduces the passive resistance.
Stability       Consider the possible instability in any berm or exposed slope. The sliding
                  potential beneath the wall or behind the tiebacks should also be
                  evaluated. For weak soils, deep seated bearing failure due to the weight
                  of the supported soil should be checked. Also include in stability analysis
                  the weight of surcharge or weight of other facilities in close proximity to
                  the excavation.
Piping          Piping due to a high groundwater table causes a loss of ground, especially
                  for silty and fine sands. Difficulties occur due to flow of water beneath
                  the wall, through bad joints in the wall, or through unsealed sheet pile
                  handling holes. Dewatering may be required.
Movements       Movements can be minimized through the use of a stiff wall supported by
                 preloaded tiebacks or a braced system.
Dewatering      Dewatering reduces the loads on the wall system and minimizes the
  and             possible loss of ground due to piping. Dewatering may cause settlements
  recharge        and in order to minimize settlements, there may be the need to recharge
                  outside of the wall system.
Surcharge       Construction materials are usually stored near the wall systems. Allowances
                  should always be made for surcharge loads on the wall system.
Prestressing    In order to minimize soil and wall movements, it is useful to remove slack
  of tieback      by prestressing tieback anchors.
  anchors
Construction    The amount of wall movement is dependent on the depth of the excavation.
  sequence        The amount of load on the tiebacks is dependent on the amount of wall
                  movement which occurs before they are installed. Movements of the wall
                  should be checked at every major construction stage. Upper struts should
                  be installed as early as possible.
Temperature     Struts may be subjected to load fluctuations due to temperature differences.
                  This may be important for long struts.
Frost           In cold climates, frost penetration can cause significant loading on the wall
  penetration     system. Design of the upper portion of the wall system should be
                  conservative. Anchors may have to be heated. Freezing temperatures also
                  can cause blockage of flow of water and thus unexpected buildup of
                  water pressure.
Earthquakes     Seismic loads may be induced during an earthquake.
Factors of      The following are suggested minimum factors of safety (F) for overall
  safety          stability. Note that these values are suggested guidelines only. Design
                  factors of safety depend on project requirements.
                Earth Berms:         Permanent, F ⫽ 2.0 Temporary, F ⫽ 1.5
                Cut Slopes:          Permanent, F ⫽ 1.5 Temporary, F ⫽ 1.3
                General Stability:   Permanent, F ⫽ 1.5 Temporary, F ⫽ 1.3
                Bottom Heave:        Permanent, F ⫽ 2.0 Temporary, F ⫽ 1.5

   Source: NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.
6.104                                       SECTION SIX


TABLE 6.19 Factors Involved in the Choice of a Support System for an Excavation

  Requirements                 Type of support system                            Comments
Open excavation        Tiebacks or rakers. For shallow               Consider design items listed in
  area                   excavation, use cantilever walls.             Table 6.18.
Low initial cost       Soldier pile or sheet pile walls.             Consider design items listed in
                         Consider combined soil slope and              Table 6.18.
                         wall.
Use as part of         Diaphragm or pier walls.                      Diaphragm wall is the most
  permanent                                                            common type of permanent
  structure                                                            wall.
Subsurface             Struts or rakers that support a               Tieback capacity not adequate
  conditions of          diaphragm or pier wall.                       in soft clays.
  deep, soft clay
Subsurface             Soldier pile, diaphragm wall, or pier         Sheet piles may lose interlock
  conditions of          wall.                                         on hard driving.
  dense, gravelly
  sands or clay
Subsurface             Struts, long tiebacks, or combination         High in-situ lateral stresses are
  conditions of          of tiebacks and struts.                       relieved in overconsolidated
  overconsolidated                                                     soil. Lateral movements may
  clays                                                                be large and extend deep
                                                                       into the soil.
Avoid dewatering       Use diaphragm walls or possibly               Soldier pile wall is too
                         sheet pile walls in soft subsoils.            pervious for this application.
Minimize lateral       Use high preloads on stiff strutted           Analyze the stability of the
 movements of            or tieback walls.                             bottom of the excavation.
 wall
Wide excavation        Use tiebacks or rackers.                      Tiebacks are preferable except
 (greater than 65                                                      in very soft clay soils.
 ft wide)
Narrow excavation      Use cross-excavation struts.                  Struts are more economical, but
  (less than 65 ft                                                     tiebacks still may be
  wide)                                                                preferred in order to keep the
                                                                       excavation open.
   Note: Deep excavation is defined as an excavation that is more than 20 feet (6 m) below ground surface.
   Source: NAVFAC DM-7.2, 1982.



         deforms downslope without increasing in density. To deal with this situa-
         tion, the slope can be overbuilt and then cut back to the compacted core.
         The second-best alternative is to use conventional construction procedures
         such as back-rolling techniques or by using a bulldozer to track-walk the
         slope.
    (e) Revision of Grading Operations. Every grading job is different, and there
         could be a change in grading operations based on field conditions.
 8. Fine Grading (also known as Precise Grading). At the completion of the
    rough grading operations, fine grading is performed to obtain the finish ele-
    vations in accordance with the precise grading plan.
                         SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                           6.105


 9. Slope Protection and Erosion Control. Although this is usually not the re-
    sponsibility of the grading contractor, upon completion of the fine grading,
    slope protection and permanent erosion control devices are installed.
10. Trench Excavations. Utility trenches are excavated in the proposed road align-
    ments and building pads for the installation of the on-site utilities. The exca-
    vation and compaction of utility trenches is often part of the grading process.
    Once the utility lines are installed, scarifying and recompaction of the road
    subgrade is performed and base material is placed and compacted.
11. Footing and Foundation Excavations. Although this is usually not part of the
    grading operation, the footing and foundation elements are then excavated (see
    Art. 6.9).


6.10.1   Compaction Fundamentals

An important part of the grading of the site often includes the compaction of fill.
Compaction is defined as the densification of a fill by mechanical means. This
physical process of getting the soil into a dense state can increase the shear strength,
decrease the compressibility, and decrease the permeability of the soil. There are
four basic factors that affect compaction:
1. Soil Type. Nonplastic (i.e., granular) soil, such as sands and gravels, can be
   effectively compacted by using a vibrating or shaking type of compaction op-
   eration. Plastic (i.e., cohesive) soil, such as silts and clays, is more difficult to
   compact and requires a kneading or manipulation type of compaction operation.
   If the soil contains oversize particles, such as coarse gravel and cobbles, these
   particles tend to interfere with the compaction process and reduce the effective-
   ness of compaction for the finer soil particles. Typical values of dry density for
   different types of compacted soil are listed in Table 6.20.
2. Material Gradation. Those soils that have a well-graded grain size distribution
   can generally be compacted into a denser state than a poorly graded soil that is
   composed of soil particles of about the same size. For example, a well-graded
   decomposed granite (DG) can have a maximum dry density of 2.2 Mg / m3 (137
   pcf), while a poorly graded sand can have a maximum dry density of only 1.6
   Mg / m3 (100 pcf, Modified Proctor).
3. Water Content. The water content is an important parameter in the compaction
   of soil. Water tends to lubricate the soil particles thus helping them slide into
   dense arrangements. However, too much water and the soil becomes saturated
   and often difficult to compact. There is an optimum water content at which the
   soil can be compacted into its densest state for a given compaction energy.
   Typical optimum moisture contents (Modified Proctor) for different soil types
   are as follows:
   (a) Clay of High Plasticity (CH): optimum moisture content ⱖ 18%
   (b) Clay of Low Plasticity (CL): optimum moisture content ⫽ 12 to 18%
   (c) Well-Graded Sand (SW): optimum moisture content ⫽ 10%
   (d ) Well-Graded Gravel (GW): optimum moisture content ⫽ 7%
       Some soils may be relatively insensitive to compaction water content. For
   example, open-graded gravels and clean coarse sands are so permeable that water
   simply drains out of the soil or is forced out of the soil during the compaction
   process. These types of soil can often be placed in a dry state and then vibrated
   into dense particle arrangements.
 TABLE 6.20 Characteristics of Compacted Subgrade for Roads and Airfields (from The Unified Soil
 Classification System, U.S. Army, 1960)

         Major                                               USCS                                                      Value as subgrade     Potential frost
        divisions                Subdivisions               symbol                        Name                          (no frost action)        action
           (1)                       (2)                      (3)                          (4)                                 (5)                (6)
 Coarse-grained soils   Gravel and gravelly soils            GW      Well-graded gravels or gravel-sand mixtures,      Excellent            None to very
                                                                      little or no fines                                                      slight
                                                             GP      Poorly graded gravels or gravelly sands,          Good to excellent    None to very
                                                                       little or no fines                                                     slight
                                                             GM      Silty gravels, gravel-sand-silt mixtures          Good to excellent    Slight to medium
                                                             GC      Clayey gravels, gravel-sand-clay mixtures         Good                 Slight to medium
                        Sand and sandy soils                 SW      Well-graded sands or gravelly sands, litttle      Good                 None to very
                                                                      or no fines                                                             slight
                                                             SP      Poorly graded sands or gravelly sands, little     Fair to good         None to very
                                                                       or no fines                                                            slight
                                                             SM      Silty sands, sand-silt mixtures                   Fair to good         Slight to high
                                                             SC      Clayey sands, sand-clay mixtures                  Poor to fair         Slight to high
 Fine-grained soils     Silts and clays with liquid limit    ML      Inorganic silts, rock flour, silts of low         Poor to fair         Medium to very
                           less than 50                                plasticity                                                            high
                                                             CL      Inorganic clays of low plasticity, gravelly       Poor to fair         Medium to high
                                                                       clays, sandy clays, etc.
                                                             OL      Organic silts and organic clays of low            Poor                 Medium to high
                                                                       plasticity
                        Silts and clays with liquid limit    MH      Inorganic silts, micaceous silts, silts of high   Poor                 Medium to very
                           greater than 50                             plasticity                                                            high
                                                             CH      Inorganic clays of high plasticity, fat clays,    Poor to fair         Medium
                                                                       silty clays, etc.
                                                             OH      Organic silts and organic clays of high           Poor to very poor    Medium
                                                                       plasticity
 Peat                   Highly organic                       PT      Peat and other highly organic soils               Not suitable         Slight
6.106
 TABLE 6.20 Characterics of Compacted Subgrade for Roads and Airfields (from The Unified Soil
 Classification System, U.S. Army, 1960) (Continued)

                                                                                                               Typical dry densities
                                         Drainage                                                                                                   Sub. mod.,a
                                                                                                                       (10)
        Compressibility                  properties                      Compaction equipment                                            CBR            pci
            (7)                             (8)                                  (9)                            pcf         Mg / m3      (11)          (12)
 Almost none                      Excellent                      Crawler-type tractor, rubber-tired roller,   125–140      2.00–2.24    40–80        300–500
                                                                   steel-wheeled roller
 Almost none                      Excellent                      Crawler-type tractor, rubber-tired roller,   110–140      1.76–2.24    30–60        300–500
                                                                   steel-wheeled roller
 Very slight to slight            Fair to very poor              Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot roller       115–145      1.84–2.32    20–60        200–500
 Slight                           Poor to very poor              Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot roller       130–145      2.08–2.32    20–40        200–500
 Almost none                      Excellent                      Crawler-type tractor, rubber-tired roller    110–130      1.76–2.08    20–40        200–400

 Almost none                      Excellent                      Crawler-type tractor, rubber-tired roller    105–135      1.68–2.16    10–40        150–400

 Very slight to medium            Fair to poor                   Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot roller       100–135      1.60–2.16    10–40        100–400
 Slight to medium                 Poor to very poor              Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot roller       100–135      1.60–2.16      5–20       100–300
 Slight to medium                 Fair to poor                   Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot roller       90–130       1.44–2.08   15 or less    100–200

 Medium                           Practically impervious         Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot roller       90–130       1.44–2.08   15 or less     50–150

 Medium to high                   Poor                           Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot roller       90–105       1.44–1.68    5 or less     50–100

 High                             Fair to poor                   Sheepsfoot roller, rubber-tired roller       80–105       1.28–1.68   10 or less     50–100

 High                             Practically impervious         Sheepsfoot roller, rubber-tired roller       90–115       1.44–1.84   15 or less     50–150

 High                             Practically impervious         Sheepsfoot roller, rubber-tired roller       80–110       1.28–1.76    5 or less     25–100

 Very high                        Fair to poor                   Compaction not practical                       —              —          —             —
        Source: U.S. Army, ‘‘The Unified Soil Classification System.’’
        a
          Subgrade Modulus.
6.107
6.108                                SECTION SIX


4. Compaction Effort (or Energy). The compactive effort is a measure of the
   mechanical energy applied to the soil. Usually, the greater the amount of com-
   paction energy applied to a soil, the denser the soil will become. There are
   exceptions, such as pumping soils (i.e., saturated clays), which can not be den-
   sified by an increased compaction effort. Compactors are designed to use one
   or a combination of the following types of compaction effort:
   (a) Static weight or pressure
   (b) Kneading action or manipulation
   (c) Impact or a sharp blow
   (d ) Vibration or shaking

    The laboratory compaction test consists of compacting a soil at a known water
content into a mold of specific dimensions using a certain compaction energy. The
procedure is repeated for various water contents to establish the compaction curve.
The most common testing procedures (compaction energy, number of soil layers in
the mold, etc.) are the Modified Proctor (ASTM D 1557-91, 1998) and the Standard
Proctor (ASTM D 698-91, 1998). The term Proctor is in honor of R. R. Proctor,
who in 1933 showed that the dry density of a soil for a given compactive effort
depends on the amount of water the soil contains during compaction.
    For the Modified Proctor (ASTM D 1557-91, 1998, procedure A), the soil is
compacted into a 10.2-cm (4-in) diameter mold that has a volume of 944 cm3
(1 / 30 ft3), where five layers of soil are compacted into the mold, with each layer
receiving 25 blows from a 44.5-N (10-lbf) hammer that has a 0.46-m (18-in) drop.
The Modified Proctor has a compaction energy of 2700 kN-m / m3 (56,000 ft-lbf /
ft3). The test procedure is to prepare soil at a certain water content, compact the
soil into the mold, and then, by recording the mass of soil within the mold, obtain
the wet density of the compacted soil. By measuring the water content of the
compacted soil, the dry density can be calculated. This compaction procedure is
repeated for the soil at different water contents and then the data are plotted on a
graph in order to obtain the compaction curve.
    Figure 6.46 shows the compaction curves for various soils using the Modified
Proctor compaction test. The compaction curves show the relationship between the
dry density (or dry unit weight) and water content for a given compaction effort.
The compaction data presented in Fig. 6.46 were obtained using the Modified Proc-
tor specifications. The lines to the right of the compaction curves are each known
as a zero air voids curve. These curves represent a condition of saturation (S ⫽
100%) for a specified specific gravity. Note how the right side of the compaction
curves are approximately parallel to the zero air voids curve. This is often the case
for many soil types and can be used as a check on the laboratory test results.
    The peak point of the compaction curve is the laboratory maximum dry density
(or the maximum dry unit weight). The water content corresponding to the labo-
ratory maximum dry density is known as the optimum moisture content. These
laboratory data are important because it tells the grading contractor the best water
content for the most efficient compaction of the soil.
    The most common method of assessing the quality of the field compaction is to
calculate the relative compaction (RC) of the fill, defined as: RC ⫽ 100 ␳d / ␳d max,
where ␳d max ⫽ laboratory maximum dry density and ␳d ⫽ field dry density. The
maximum dry density ( ␳d max) is the peak point of the laboratory compaction curve.
In order for ␳d to be determined, a field density test must be performed. Field
density tests can be classified as either destructive or nondestructive tests. Probably
the most common destructive method of determining the field dry density is through
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                6.109




      FIGURE 6.46 Compaction curves for various soils using the Modified Proctor lab-
      oratory test specifications.


the use of the sand cone apparatus. The test procedure consists of excavating a hole
in the ground, filling the hole with sand using the sand cone apparatus, and then
determining the volume of the hole based on the amount of sand required to fill
the hole. Knowing the wet mass of soil removed from the hole divided by the
volume of the hole enables the wet density of the soil to be calculated. The water
content (w) of the soil extracted from the hole can be determined and thus the dry
density ( ␳d ) can then be calculated.
   Another type of destructive test for determining the field dry density is the drive
cylinder. This method involves the driving of a steel cylinder of known volume
6.110                               SECTION SIX


into the soil. Based on the mass of soil within the cylinder, the wet density can be
calculated. Once the water content (w) of the soil is obtained, the dry density
( ␳d ) of the fill can be calculated.
    Probably the most common type of nondestructive field test is the nuclear
method. In this method, the wet density is determined by the attenuation of gamma
radiation. The nuclear method can give inaccurate results (density too high) where
oversize particles are present, such as coarse gravel and cobbles. Likewise, if there
is a large void in the source-detector path, then unusually low density values may
be recorded.


6.10.2   Site Improvement Methods

If the expected settlement for a proposed structure is too large, then different foun-
dation support or soil stabilization options must be evaluated. As discussed in Art.
6.8.2, one alternative is a deep foundation system that can transfer structural loads
to adequate bearing material in order to bypass a compressible soil layer. Another
option is to construct a floating foundation, which is a special type of deep foun-
dation where the weight of the structure is balanced by the removal of soil and
construction of an underground basement. Other alternatives include site improve-
ment methods, such as the following (see Table 6.21):
   Soil Replacement. As indicated in Table 6.21, there are basically two types of
   soil replacement methods: (1) removal and replacement, and (2) displacement.
   The first is the most common approach and consists of the removal of the com-
   pressible soil layer and replacement with structural fill during the grading op-
   erations. Usually the remove and replace grading option is economical only if
   the compressible soil layer is near the ground surface and the groundwater table
   is below the compressible soil layer or the groundwater table can be economi-
   cally lowered.
   Water Removal. Table 6.21 lists several different types of water removal site
   improvement techniques. If the site contains an underlying compressible cohe-
   sive soil layer, the site can be surcharged with a fill layer placed at ground
   surface. Vertical drains (such as wick drains or sand drains) can be installed in
   the compressible soil layer to reduce the drainage path and speed up the con-
   solidation process. Once the compressible cohesive soil layer has had sufficient
   consolidation, the fill surcharge layer is removed and the building is constructed.
   Site Strengthening. Many different methods can be used to strengthen the on-
   site soil (see Table 6.21). For example, deep vibratory techniques are often used
   to increase the density of loose sand deposits.
   Grouting. In order to stabilize the ground, fluid grout can be injected into the
   ground to fill in joints, fractures, or underground voids. For the releveling of
   existing structures, one option is mudjacking, which has been defined as a pro-
   cess whereby a water and soil-cement or soil-lime cement grout is pumped
   beneath the slab, under pressure, to produce a lifting force that literally floats
   the slab to the desired position. Another commonly used site improvement tech-
   nique is compaction grouting, which consists of intruding a mass of very thick-
   consistency grout into the soil, which both displaces and compacts the loose
   soil. Compaction grouting has proved successful in increasing the density of
   poorly compacted fill, alluvium, and compressible or collapsible soil. The ad-
   vantages of compaction grouting are less expense and disturbance to the structure
TABLE 6.21 Site Improvement Methods

        Method           Technique                   Principles                    Suitable soils                  Remarks
                    Remove and replace    Excavate weak or undesirable       Any                        Limited depth and area where
                                            material and replace with                                     cost-effective; generally ⱕ 30
                                            better soils                                                  ft
Soil replacement    Displacement          Overload weak soils so that        Very soft                  Problems with mud-waves and
  methods                                   they shear and are displaced                                  trapped compressible soil
                                            by stronger fill                                              under the embankment;
                                                                                                          highly dependent on specific
                                                                                                          site
                    Trenching             Allows water drainage              Soft, fine-grained soils   Effective depth up to 10 ft;
                                                                               and hydraulic fills        speed dependent on soil and
                                                                                                          trench spacing; resulting
                                                                                                          desiccated crust can improve
                                                                                                          site mobility
                    Precompression        Loads applied prior to             Normally consolidated      Generally economical; long time
                                            construction to allow soil         fine-grained soil,         may be needed to obtain
Water removal                               consolidation                      organic soil, fills        consolidation; effective depth
 methods                                                                                                  only limited by ability to
                                                                                                          achieve needed stresses
                    Precompression with   Shortens drainage path to speed    Same as above              More costly; effective depth
                      vertical drains       consolidation                                                usually limited to ⱕ100 ft
                    Electro-osmosis       Electric current causes water to   Normally consolidated      Expensive; relatively fast;
                                            flow to cathode                    silts and silty clay       usable in confined area; not
                                                                                                          usable in conductive soils;
                                                                                                          best for small areas
6.111
   TABLE 6.21 Site Improvement Methods (Continued)

        Method               Technique                      Principles                   Suitable soils                    Remarks
                        Dynamic compaction       Large impact loads applied by      Cohesionless best;         Simple and rapid; usable above
                                                   repeated dropping of a 5- to       possible use for soils     and below the groundwater
                                                   35-ton weight; larger weights      with fines; cohesive       table; effective depths up to
                                                   have been used                     soils below                60 ft; moderate cost; potential
                                                                                      groundwater table          vibration damage to adjacent
                                                                                      give poorest results       structures
                        Vibro-compaction         Vibrating equipment densifies      Cohesionless soils with    Can be efffective up to 100 feet
                                                   soils                              ⬍20 percent fines          depth; can achieve good
   Site strengthening
                                                                                                                 density and uniformity; grid
      methods
                                                                                                                 spacing of holes critical;
                                                                                                                 relatively expensive
                        Vibro-replacement        Jetting and vibration used to      Soft cohesive soils        Relatively expensive
                                                    penetrate and remove soil;        (su ⫽ 15 to 50 kPa,
                                                    compacted granular fill then      300 to 1000 psf)
                                                    placed in hole to form
                                                    support columns surrounded
                                                    by undisturbed soil
                        Vibro-displacement       Similar to vibro-replacement       Stiffer cohesive soils     Relatively expensive
                                                   except soil is displaced            (su ⫽ 30 to 60 kPa,
                                                   laterally rather than removed       600 to 1200 psf)
                                                   from the hole
                        Injection of grout       Fill soil voids with cementing     Wide spectrum of           Expensive; more expensive
                                                    agents to strengthen and         coarse- and fine-           grouts needed for finer-
                                                    reduce permeability              grained soils               grained soils; may use
                                                                                                                 pressure injection, soil
                                                                                                                 fracturing, or compaction
   Grouting                                                                                                      techniques
                        Deep mixing              Jetting or augers used to          Wide spectrum of           Jetting poor for highly cohesive
                                                    physically mix stabilizer and    coarse- and fine-            clays and some gravelly soils;
                                                    soil                             grained soils                deep mixing best for soft
                                                                                                                  soils up to 165 ft deep
6.112
TABLE 6.21 Site Improvement Methods (Continued)

        Method                    Technique                           Principles                          Suitable soils                    Remarks
                           Heat                           Heat used to achieve                      Cohesive soils              High energy requirements; cost
                                                            irreversible strength gain and                                        limits practicality
                                                            reduced water susceptibility
Thermal                    Freezing                       Moisture in soil frozen to hold           All soils below the         Expensive; highly effective for
                                                           particles together and                     groundwater table;          excavations and tunneling;
                                                           increase shear strength and                cohesive soils above        high groundwater flows
                                                           reduce permeability                        the groundwater             troublesome; slow process
                                                                                                      table
Geosynthetics              Geogrids, geotextiles,         Use geosynthetic materials for            Effective filters for all   Widely used to accomplish a
                             geonets, and                   filters, erosion control, water           soils; reinforcement       variety of tasks; commonly
                             geomembranes                   barriers, drains, or soil                 often used for soft        used in conjunction with
                                                            reinforcing (see Art. 6.11)               soils                      other methods (e.g., strip
                                                                                                                                 drain with surcharge or to
                                                                                                                                 build a construction platform
                                                                                                                                 for site access)
    Source: M. P. Rollings and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Materials in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing
Co., New York.
6.113
6.114                                    SECTION SIX


  than foundation underpinning, and it can be used to relevel the structure. The
  disadvantages are that analyzing the results is difficult, it is usually ineffective
  near slopes or for near-surface soils because of the lack of confining pressure,
  and the danger exists of filling underground pipes with grout.
  Thermal. As indicated in Table 6.21, the thermal site improvement method con-
  sists of either heating or freezing the soil in order to improve its shear strength
  and reduce its permeability.
   Figure 6.47 presents a summary of site-improvement methods as a function of
soil grain size.




        FIGURE 6.47 Site improvement methods as a function of soil grain size. (Re-
        produced from M. P. Rollings and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Materials in Con-
        struction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permission of McGraw-
        Hill, Inc.)
                            SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                    6.115


6.11     GEOSYNTHETICS

A geosynthetic is defined as a planar product manufactured from polymeric ma-
terial and typically placed in soil to form an integral part of a drainage, reinforce-
ment, or stabilization system. Common types of geosynthetics used during construc-
tion are as follows.



6.11.1   Geogrids

Figure 6.48 shows a photograph of a geogrid, which contains relatively high-
strength polymer grids consisting of longitudinal and transverse ribs connected at
their intersections. Geogrids have a large and open structure and the openings (i.e.,
apertures) are usually 0.5 to 4 in (1.3 to 10 cm) in length and / or width. Geogrids
can be either biaxial or uniaxial, depending on the size of the apertures and shape
of the interconnecting ribs. Geogrids are principally used as soil reinforcement,
such as for subgrade stabilization, slope reinforcement, erosion control, mechani-
cally stabilized earth retaining walls, and to strengthen the junction between the
top of soft clays and overlying embankments. Geogrids are also used as an overlay
in the construction or repair of asphalt pavements because they tend to reduce
reflective cracking of the pavements.
    Compacted soil tends to be strong in compression but weak in tension. The
geogrid is just the opposite, strong in tension but weak in compression. Thus, layers
of compacted soil and geogrid tend to complement each other and produce a soil
mass having both high compressive and tensile strength. The open structure of the
geogrid (see Fig. 6.48) allows the compacted soil to bond in the open geogrid
spaces. Geogrids provide soil reinforcement by transferring local tensile stresses in
the soil to the geogrid. Because geogrids are continuous, they also tend to transfer




       FIGURE 6.48 Photograph of a geogrid. (Reproduced from M. P. Rollings and R.
       S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Materials in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.,
       New York, with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
6.116                               SECTION SIX


and redistribute stresses away from areas of high stress concentrations (such as
beneath a wheel load).
   Some of the limitations of geogrid are as follows:
1. Ultraviolet Light. Even geogrids produced of carbon black (i.e., ultraviolet sta-
   bilized geogrids) can degrade when exposed to long-term ultraviolet light. It is
   important to protect the geogrid from sunlight and cover the geogrid with fill as
   soon as possible.
2. Non-uniform Tensile Strength. Geogrids often have different tensile strengths
   in different directions as a result of the manufacturing process. For example, a
   Tensar SS-2 (BX1200) biaxial geogrid has an ultimate tensile strength of 2100
   lb / ft in the main direction and only 1170 lb / ft in the minor (perpendicular)
   direction. It is essential that the engineer always check the manufacturer’s spec-
   ifications and determine the tensile strengths in the main and minor directions.
3. Creep. Polymer material can be susceptible to creep. Thus, it is important to
   use an allowable tensile strength that does allow for creep of the geosynthetic.
   Oftentimes, this allowable tensile design strength is much less than the ultimate
   strength of the geogrid. For example, for a Tensar SS-2 (BX1200) biaxial geo-
   grid, the manufacturer’s recommended tensile strength is about 300 lb / ft, which
   is only one-seventh the ultimate tensile strength (2100 lb / ft). The engineer
   should never apply an arbitrary factor of safety to the ultimate tensile strength,
   but rather obtain the allowable geogrid tensile design strength from the manu-
   facturer.


6.11.2   Geotextiles

Geotextiles are the most widely used type of geosynthetic. Geotextiles are often
referred to as fabric. For example, common construction terminology for geotex-
tiles includes geofabric, filter fabric, construction fabric, synthetic fabric, and
road-reinforcing fabric. As shown in Figs. 6.49 and 6.50, geotextiles are usually
categorized as either woven or nonwoven, depending on the type of manufacturing
process. Geotextiles are used for many different purposes, as follows:
1. Soil Reinforcement. Used for subgrade stabilization, slope reinforcement, and
   mechanically stabilized earth retaining walls. Also used to strengthen the junc-
   tion between the top of soft clays and overlying embankments.
2. Sediment Control. Used as silt fences to trap sediment on-site.
3. Erosion Control. Installed along channels, under riprap, and used for shore and
   beach protection.
4. Asphalt Overlay. Used in asphalt overlays to reduce reflective cracking.
5. Separation. Used between two dissimilar materials, such as an open graded
   base and a clay subgrade, in order to prevent contamination.
6. Filtration and Drainage. Used in place of a graded filter where the flow of
   water occurs across (perpendicular to) the plane of the geotextile. For drainage
   applications, the water flows within the geotextile.
   Probably the most common usage of geotextiles is for filtration (flow of water
through the geotextile). For filtration, the geotextile should be at least 10 times
more permeable than the soil. In addition, the geotextile must always be placed
                      SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                       6.117




FIGURE 6.49 Photograph of nonwoven geotextiles. The geotextile on the left has
no ultraviolet protection, while the geotextile on the right has ultraviolet protection.
(Reproduced from M. P. Rollings and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Materials in
Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permission of McGraw-
Hill, Inc.)




FIGURE 6.50 Photograph of a woven geotextile. (Reproduced from M. P. Rollings
and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Materials in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Pub-
lishing Co., New York, with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
6.118                                SECTION SIX


between a less permeable (i.e., the soil) and a more permeable (i.e., the open graded
gravel) material. An inappropriate use of a geotextile would be to wrap it around
a drainage pipe and then cover the geotextile with open-graded gravel. This is
because the geotextile would then have more permeable material on both sides of
the geotextile and it would tend to restrict flow.
   Two important design properties for geotextiles used as filtration devices are that
they have an adequate flow capacity and a proper soil retention capability:

1. Flow Capacity. Although specifications have been developed that limit the open
   area of the filtration geotextile to 10% or even 5%, it is best to have a larger
   open area to develop an adequate flow capacity.
2. Soil Retention Capability. The apparent opening size (AOS), also known as
   the equivalent opening size (EOS), determines the soil retention capability. The
   AOS is often expressed in terms of opening size (mm) or equivalent sieve size
   (e.g., AOS ⫽ 40–70 indicates openings equivalent to the No. 40 to No. 70
   sieves). Obviously, if the geotextile openings are larger than the largest soil
   particle diameter, then all of the soil particles will migrate through the geotextile
   and clog the drainage system. A common recommendation is that the required
   AOS be less than or equal to D85 (grain size corresponding to 85% percent
   passing).

   Some of the limitations of geotextile are as follows:

1. Ultraviolet Light. Geotextile that has no ultraviolet light protection can rapidly
   deteriorate. For example, certain polypropylene geotextiles lost 100% of their
   strength after only 8 weeks of exposure.
2. Sealing of Geotextile. When the geotextile is used for filtration, an impermeable
   soil layer can develop adjacent the geotextile if it has too low an open area or
   too small an AOS.
3. Construction Problems. Some of the more common problems related to con-
   struction with geotextiles are as follows (G. N. Richardson and D. C. Wyant,
   ‘‘Geotextiles Construction Criteria’’):
   (a) Fill placement or compaction techniques damage the geotextile.
   (b) Installation loads are greater than design loads, leading to failure during
        construction.
   (c) Construction environment leads to a significant reduction in assumed fabric
        properties, causing failure of the completed project.
   (d ) Field seaming or overlap of the geotextile fails to fully develop desired
        fabric mechanical properties.
   (e) Instabilities during various construction phases may render a design inade-
        quate even though the final product would have been stable.


6.11.3   Geomembranes

Common construction terminology for geomembranes includes liners, membranes,
visqueen, plastic sheets, and impermeable sheets. Geomembranes are used almost
exclusively as barriers to reduce water or vapor migration through soil (see Fig.
6.51). For example, a common usage for geomembranes is for the lining and cap-
ping systems in municipal landfills. For liners in municipal landfills, the thickness
                          SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                                   6.119




      FIGURE 6.51 Photograph of a geomembrane, which has a surface texture for
      added friction. (Reproduced from M. P. Rollings and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical
      Materials in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permis-
      sion of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)



of the geomembrane is usually at least 80 mil. In the United States, one mil is one-
thousandth of an inch.
   Some of the limitations of geomembranes are as follows:

1. Puncture Resistance. The geomembrane must be thick enough so that it is not
   punctured during installation and subsequent usage.
2. Slide Resistance. Slope failures have developed in municipal liners because of
   the smooth and low frictional resistance between the geomembrane and over-
   lying or underlying soil. Textured geomembranes (such as shown in Fig. 6.51)
   have been developed to increase the frictional resistance of the geomembrane
   surface.
3. Sealing of Seams. A common cause of leakage through geomembranes is due
   to inadequate sealing of seams. The following are different methods commonly
   used to seal geomembrane seams (M. P. Rollings and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotech-
   nical Materials in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York):
   (a) Thermal Fusion. Suitable for thermoplastics. Adjacent surfaces are melted
        and then pressed together. Commercial equipment is available that uses a
        heated wedge (most common) or hot air to melt the materials. Also, ultra-
        sonic energy can be used for melting rather than heat.
   (b) Solvent-Based Systems. Suitable for materials that are compatible with the
        solvent. A solvent is used with pressure to join adjacent surfaces. Heating
        may be used to accelerate the curing. The solvent may contain some of the
        geomembrane polymer already dissolved in the solvent liquid (bodied sol-
        vent) or an adhesive to improve the seam quality.
   (c) Contact Adhesive. Primarily suitable for thermosets. Solution is brushed
        onto surfaces to be joined, and pressure is applied to ensure good contact.
        Upon curing, the adhesive bonds the surfaces together.
6.120                                      SECTION SIX




        FIGURE 6.52 Photograph of a geonet. (Reproduced from M. P. Rollings and R.
        S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Materials in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.,
        New York, with permission of McGraw-Hill, Inc.)




        FIGURE 6.53 Photograph of a geocomposite. The geocomposite consists of a
        geonet having a textured geomembrane on top, and a filter fabric (geotextile) on the
        bottom. (Reproduced from M. P. Rollings and R. S. Rollings, ‘‘Geotechnical Mate-
        rials in Construction,’’ McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., New York, with permission of
        McGraw-Hill, Inc.)
                        SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATIONS                        6.121


   (d ) Extrusion Welding. Suitable for all polyethylenes. A ribbon of molten pol-
        ymer is extruded over the edge (fillet weld) or between the geomembrane
        sheets (flat weld). This melts the adjacent surfaces, which are then fused
        together upon cooling.


6.11.4   Geonets and Geocomposites

Geonets are three-dimensional netlike polymeric materials used for drainage (flow
of water within the geosynthetic). Figure 6.52 shows a photograph of a geonet.
Geonets are usually used in conjunction with a geotextile and / or geomembrane and
hence are technically a geocomposite.
    Depending on the particular project requirements, different types of geosynthet-
ics can be combined together to form a geocomposite. For example, a geocomposite
consisting of a geotextile and a geomembrane provides for a barrier that has in-
creased tensile strength and resistance to punching and tearing. Figure 6.53 shows
a photograph of a geocomposite consisting of a textured geomembrane, geonet, and
geotextile (filter fabric).


6.11.5   Geosynthetic Clay Liners

Geosynthetic clay liners are frequently used as liners for muncipal landfills. The
geosynthetic clay liner typically consists of dry bentonite sandwiched between two
geosynthetics. When moisture infiltrates the geosynthetic clay liner, the bentonite
swells and creates a soil layer having a very low hydraulic conductivity, transform-
ing it into an effective barrier to moisture migration.
                      SECTION SEVEN
               STRUCTURAL STEEL
                 CONSTRUCTION
                                 Bruce Glidden
                           President, Glidden & Co., Ltd.
                             Bridgeville, Pennsylvania




Structural steel is an economical construction material for building applications. It
offers high ratios of strength to weight and strength to volume. Thus, structural
steel has the advantage of permitting long clear spans for horizontal members and
requiring less floor space for columns than other common construction materials.
It also can be used in combination with reinforced concrete to provide cost-effective
building components. For large industrial buildings, where the structural frame can
be exposed, it is often the material of choice.
    The design of a structural building frame involves the following principal steps:
1. Select the general configuration and type of structure (Sec. 1).
2. Determine the service loads as required by the applicable building code (Art.
   5.1.2).
3. Compute the internal forces and moments for the individual members (Sec. 5).
4. Proportion the members and connections.
5. Check performance characteristics, such as deflection, under service conditions.
6. Make a general overall review for economy of function.
7. Prepare complete design drawings delineating all structural steel requirements.
   Designers, in addition to performing these steps, should also have an apprecia-
tion of the complete construction cycle to assure a practical and economical design.
This includes understanding the needs of other disciplines and trades, types and
availability of the materials used in steel of construction, applicable codes and
specifications, the role and responsibilities of the fabricator and the erector, and a
designer’s own responsibilities in the area of quality assurance.
   The other principal parties involved in structural steel construction are fabricators
and erectors. Erectors frequently act as a subcontractor to the fabricator. Fabrication
operations convert the mill materials into shipping pieces ready for erection at the
jobsite. These operations are generally performed in a shop. The pieces are sized
and shaped to the dimensions shown on detailed shop drawings that are prepared
                                          7.1
7.2                                 SECTION SEVEN


by the fabricator and approved by the structural designer. Shop attachment of detail
pieces (stiffeners, connection materials, etc.) to the individual shipping pieces is
most frequently done by welding. Generally, the fabricator is responsible for mov-
ing the fabricated material to the jobsite. The fabricator determines the size of
shipping pieces, with the concurrence of the designer, at the time the shop drawings
are prepared.
   Erectors receive the material and the position and connect the steel into its final
location at the project site. Erectors may have specific equipment on unique projects
with which they are able to perform cost-effective operations. Such equipment may
require attachment points or stiffening of the frame elements, in which case ap-
proval of the designer is requested.
   Structural steel consists of hot-rolled steel shapes, steel plates of thickness of 1⁄8
in or greater, and such fittings as bolts, welds, bracing rods, and turnbuckles. The
owner and the engineer should understand fully what will be furnished by the
fabricator under a contract to furnish ‘‘structural steel.’’ To promote uniformity in
bidding practices, the American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) has adopted
a ‘‘Code of Standard Practice for Buildings and Bridges’’ (American Institute of
Steel Construction, One East Wacker Drive, Suite 3100, Chicago, IL 60601-2001).
Additional design guides are shown in Table 7.1.


7.1   CODES AND SPECIFICATIONS

Codes, specifications, and standards provide steel designers with sound design pro-
cedures and guidelines. These documents cover selection of service and design
loads, criteria for proportioning members and their connections, procedures for
fabrication and erection, requirements for inspections, and standards for protection
against corrosion and fire. Use of these documents generally ensures safety, eco-
nomical designs, and sound operational techniques.
    The applicable building code defines the minimum legal requirements for a de-
sign. Most building authorities incorporate in their building code one of the model
building codes (Art. 1.10), but some write their code requirements. Usually, the
basis for the requirements for steel design and construction in building codes are
the American Institute of Steel Construction specifications for structural steel build-
ings (Table 7.1). Note that two AISC specifications are available, one applicable to
allowable stress design and plastic design (ASD) and the second to load and resis-
tance factor design (LRFD).
    Table 7.1 also lists other codes and specifications most frequently used by steel
designers. Requirements for special-function buildings, needs of governmental
agencies, and other unique requirements has led to promulgation of many other
codes and specifications. Some of the organizations that publish these standards are
the General Services Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, Corps of En-
gineers, and U.S. Navy Bureau of Yards and Docks.


7.2   MILL MATERIALS

The steel shapes, plates, and bars that make up most of the materials used for
structural steel are produced by mills as hot-rolled products. These products are
made in a batch process; each production run of steel comes from a ‘‘heat.’’ The
                              STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                             7.3


TABLE 7.1 Basic Steel Construction Codes and Specifications

         Organization                       Document                        Scope
American Institute of Steel        Code of Standard Practice for   Defines structural steel
  Construction (AISC)                Steel Buildings and           Plans and specifications
One East Wacker Drive                Bridges                       Fabrication
Chicago, IL 60601-2001                                             Erection
                                                                   Quality control
                                   Specification for Structural    Materials
                                     Steel Buildings—              Loads
                                     Allowable Stress Design       Design criteria
                                     and Plastic Design (ASD)      Serviceability
                                                                   Fabrication
                                   Specifications for Structural
                                                                   Erection
                                     Steel Buildings—Load and
                                                                   Quality control
                                     Resistance Factor Design
                                     (LRFD)
American Iron and Steel            Specification for the Design    Materials
  Institute (AISI)                   of Cold-Formed Steel          Design criteria
1101 17th St., N.W.                  Structural Members
Washington, DC 20036
ASTM                               ASTM A6                         Delivery-shapes / plates
100 Barr Harbor Drive
                                   Various ASTM material           Physical and chemical
West Conshohocken, PA
                                     specifications                  requirements
  19428-2959
American Welding Society           Structural Welding Code—        Joint design
  (AWS)                               Steel (AWS D1.1)             Workmanship
550 N.W. LeJeune Road                                              Procedures
Miami, FL 33126                                                    Inspection
Research Council on Structural     Specifications for Structural   Materials
  Connections                        Joints Using ASTM A325        Connection design
Engineering Foundation               or A490 Bolts                 Installation
345 E. 47th St.                                                    Inspection
New York, NY 10017
Steel Joist Institute (SJI)        Standard Specifications and     Materials
3127 10th Ave., North Ext.           Load Tables, Open-Web         Design
Myrtle Beach, SC 29577-6760          Steel Joists
Steel Structures Painting          Steel Structures Painting       Good practice
   Council (SSPC)                    Manual, Vols. 1 and 2         Systems
40 24th Street, Suite 600                                          Specifications
Pittsburgh, PA 15213




specific grade of steel in all mill products is identified by reference to the heat
number.
   Through universal acceptance of ASTM specifications (Table 7.1), mill materials
have uniform physical and quality characteristics. There is no significant metallur-
gical or physical difference between products ordered to a specific ASTM specifi-
cation and rolled by any U.S. structural mill.
7.4                                      SECTION SEVEN


7.2.1   Grades of Steel

Structural steel grades are referred to by their corresponding ASTM designation.
For example, the most commonly used grade of structural steel is A36, which is
produced to meet the requirements of the ASTM A36 specification. This grade
offers a good mix of strength, weldability, and cost. In many designs, this specifi-
cation alone will satisfy designers’ needs. Other specifications, such as A53 for
pipe, provide an equivalent grade of steel for that type of product. However, as
loads on the structural elements becomes larger, other grades of steel may become
more economical because of dimensional limitations or simpler fabrication. These
grades provide greater strength levels at somewhat higher costs per unit weight.
    AISC recommends certain grades of steel, all of which have desirable charac-
teristics, such as weldability and cost-effectiveness, for use where higher strength
levels are required. The specifications covering these grades are listed in Table 7.2.
Several steels have more than one level of tensile strength and yield stress, the


            TABLE 7.2 Characteristics of Structural Steels

                                                              Minimum           Minimum
                                                               tensile            yield
               ASTM                                           strength,          stress,*
            specification          Thickness, in                 ksi                ksi
                                          Carbon Steels
            A36                To 8 in incl.                    58–80†               36
            A529               To 1⁄2 in incl.                  60–85†               42
                                High-strength, low-alloy steels
            A441               To 3⁄4 incl.                       70                 50
                               Over 3⁄4 to 11⁄2                   67                 46
                               Over 11⁄2 to 4 incl.               63                 42
                               Over 4 to 8 incl.                  60                 40
            A572               Gr 42: to 4 incl.                  60                 42
                               Gr 45: to 11⁄2 incl.               60                 45
                               Gr 50: to 11⁄2 incl.               65                 50
                               Gr 55: to 11⁄2 incl.               70                 55
                               Gr 60: to 1 incl.                  75                 60
                               Gr 65: to 1⁄2 incl.                80                 65
            A242               To 3⁄4 incl.                       70                 50
                               Over 3⁄4 to 11⁄2                   67                 46
                               Over 11⁄2 to 4 incl.               63                 42
            A588               To 4 incl.                         70                 50
                               Over 4 to 5                        67                 46
                               Over 5 to 8 incl.                  63                 42
            A992               Shapes only                        65                 50
                                  Heat-treated low-alloy steels
            A514               To 3⁄4 incl.                   115–135              100
                               Over 3⁄4 to 21⁄2               115–135              100
                               Over 21⁄2 to 4 incl.           105–135               90
               * Yield stress or yield strength, whichever shows in the stress-strain curve.
               † Minimum tensile strength may not exceed the higher value.
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.5


levels being dependent on thickness of material. The listed thicknesses are precise
for plates and nearly correct for shapes. To obtain the precise value for shapes,
refer to an AISC ‘‘Manual of Steel Construction’’ (ASD or LRFD) or to mill cat-
alogs.

Weathering Steels. The A242 and A588 grades of steel offer enhanced corrosion
resistance relative to A36 material. These steels, called weathering steels, form a
thin oxidation film on the surfaces that inhibits further corrosion in ordinary at-
mospheric conditions. However, special treatment of construction details is required.
Because of such constraints, and because these grades are more expensive, utili-
zation of weathering steels in building construction is limited. These grades are
more commonly used in bridge construction.

Steel Grade Identification. Because of the several grades of steel in use, ASTM
specifications require that each piece of hot-rolled steel be properly identified with
vital information, including the heat number. The AISC specifications for structural
steel buildings require fabricators to be prepared to demonstrate, by written pro-
cedure and by actual practice, the visible identification of all main stress-carrying
elements at least through shop assembly. Steel identification include ASTM des-
ignation, heat number (if required), and mill test reports when specifically ordered.

Availability. Because structural steel is produced in a batch process, the less com-
monly used shapes and the higher-strength grades are produced less frequently than
commonly used A36 shapes. Furthermore, steel service centers stock the smaller
A36 shapes. As a result, availability of steels can affect construction schedules.
Consequently, steel designers should be aware of the impact of specifying less
commonly used materials and shapes if the project has a tight schedule. Fabricator
representatives can provide needed information.


7.2.2   Structural Shapes

Steel mills have a standard classification for the many products they make, one of
which is structural shapes (heavy). By definition this classification takes in all
shapes having at least one cross-sectional dimension of 3 in or more. Shapes of
lesser size are classified as structural shapes (light) or, more specifically, bars.
   Shapes are identified by their cross-sectional characteristics—angles, channels,
beams, columns, tees, pipe, tubing, and piles. For convenience, structural shapes
are simply identified by letter symbols as indicated in Table 7.3. The industry


         TABLE 7.3 Symbols for Structural Shapes

                               Section                            Symbol
         Wide-flange shapes                                     W
         Standard I shapes                                      S
         Bearing-pile shapes                                    HP
         Similar shapes that cannot be grouped in W, S, or HP   M
         Structural tees cut from W, S, or M shapes             WT, ST, MT
         American standard chemicals                            C
         All other channel shapes                               MC
         Angles                                                 L
7.6                                   SECTION SEVEN


recommended standard (adopted 1970) for indicating a specific size of beam or
column-type shape on designs, purchase orders, shop drawings, etc., specifies listing
of symbol, depth, and weight, in that order. For example, W14 ⫻ 30 identifies a
wide-flange shape with nominal depth of 14 in and weight of 30 lb / lin ft. The ⫻,
read as ‘‘by,’’ is merely a separation.
    Each shape has its particular functional use, but the workhorse of building con-
struction is the wide-flange W section. For all practical purposes, W shapes have
parallel flange surfaces. The profile of a W shape of a given nominal depth and
weight available from different producers is essentially the same, except for the
size of fillets between web and flanges.

7.2.3   Tolerances for Structural Shapes and Plates
Mills are granted a tolerance because of variations peculiar to working of hot steel
and wear of equipment. Limitations for such variations are established by ASTM
specification A6.
    Wide-flange beams or columns, for example, may vary in depth by as much as
1
 ⁄2 in, i.e., 1⁄4 in over and under the nominal depth. The designer should always
keep this in mind. Fillers, shims, and extra weld metal installed during erection
may not be desirable, but often they are the only practical solution to dimensional
variations from nominal.
    Cocked flanges on column members are particularly troublesome to the erector
for it is not until the steel is erected in the field that the full extent of mill variations
becomes evident. This is particularly true for a long series of spans or bays, where
the accumulating effect of dimensional variation of many columns may require
major adjustment. Fortunately, the average variation usually is negligible and nom-
inal erection clearance allowed for by the fabricator will suffice.
    Mill tolerances also apply to beams ordered from the mills cut to length. Where
close tolerance may be desired, as sometimes required for welded connections, it
may be necessary to order the beams long and then finish the ends in the fabricating
shop to precise dimensions. This is primarily the concern of structural detailers.

7.2.4   Cambered Beams
Frequently, designers want long-span beams slightly arched (cambered) to offset
deflection under load and to prevent a flat or saggy appearance. Such beams may
be procured from the mills, the required camber being applied to cold steel. The
AISC Manuals give the maximum cambers that mills can obtain and their prediction
of the minimum cambers likely to remain permanent. Smaller cambers than these
minimums may be specified, but their permanency cannot be guaranteed. Nearly
all beams will have some camber as permitted by the tolerance for straightness,
and advantage may be taken of such camber in shop fabrication.
    A method of cambering, not dependent on mill facilities, is to employ heat. In
welded construction, it is commonplace to flame-straighten members that have be-
come distorted. By the same procedure, it is possible to distort or camber a beam
to desired dimensions.

7.2.5   Steel Plates
Used by fabricators to manufacture built-up structural members, such as columns
and girders, and for detail connection material, plates are identified by the symbol
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                             7.7


PL. Cross-sectional dimensions are given in inches (or millimeters). A plate 1⁄2 in
thick and 2 ft wide is billed as PL 1⁄2 ⫻ 24. Plates may also be specified by weight,
although this is unusual in building construction work.
    Mill tolerances for plate products for structural applications are also defined by
ASTM specification A6. There are provisions for thickness, crown, camber, and
length. Consideration of these characteristics are primarily the responsibility of
fabricators. However, steel designers should be aware of how these tolerances affect
the fabricator’s work and permit the design to accommodate these characteristics.



7.2.6   Pipe and Tubular Sections

Pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM specification A53, Types E and S, Grade
B, is comparable to A36 steel, with yield strength Fy ⫽ 36 ksi. It comes in three
weight classification: standard, extra strong, and double extra strong, and in di-
ameters ranging up to 26 in.
   Several mills produce square and rectangular tubing, known as hollow structural
sections, in sizes from 3 ⫻ 2 and 2 ⫻ 2 to 12 ⫻ 8 and 10 ⫻ 10 in, with wall
thickness up to 5⁄8 in. These flat-sided shapes afford easier connections than pipes,
not only for connecting beams but also for such items as window and door frames.
   The main strength properties of several grades of steel used for pipe and tubular
sections are summarized in Table 7.4.

Cautionary Note. Hollow structural sections are not produced to meet the re-
quirements of ASTM specification A6. Because of this characteristic, the AISC and
the Steel Tube Institute of North America recommended that the nominal wall
thickness of such sections be reduced by 7% when calculating the section properties
of these sections, (area, section modulus, and moment of inertia) so as to maintain
a factor of safety equivalent to that present in other structural steel shapes.



                TABLE 7.4 Characteristics of Pipe and Tubular Steels

                                                          Min       Min
                                                        tensile     yield
                ASTM                                   strength,   stress,
                 spec.      Grade         Product         ksi        ksi
                A53           B            Pipe          60.0      35.0*
                A500          A          Round           45.0      33.0
                              A          Shaped          45.0      39.0
                              B          Round           58.0      42.0
                              B          Shaped          58.0      46.0
                              C          Shaped          70.0      50.0
                A501         ...        All tubing       58.0      36.0
                A618          I         All tubing       70.0      50.0
                              II        All tubing       70.0      50.0
                             III        All tubing       65.0      50.0
                   * Use 36.0 for purpose of design.
7.8                                      SECTION SEVEN


7.3     FASTENERS

Two basic types of fasteners are typically used in construction, bolts and welds.
Both are used in the fabricating shop and on the job site in connections joining
individual members. Welds are also used to fasten together components of built-up
members. Bolts, however, are more commonly used for field connections, and
welds, for shop work. Rivets, which were once widely used for main connections,
both shop and field, are essentially obsolete.
   Many variables affect selection of fasteners. Included among these are economy
of fabrication and erection, availability of equipment, inspection criteria, labor sup-
ply, and such design considerations as fatigue, size and type of connections, con-
tinuity of framing, reuse, and maintenance. It is not uncommon for steel framing
to be connected with such combinations as shop welds and field bolts or to be all-
welded. It is usual to use field welds for column splices with bolted connections
elsewhere. The variables affecting decisions on use of fasteners should be explored
with engineers representing the fabricator and the erector.


7.3.1   High-Strength Bolts

Development of high-strength bolts is vested in the Research Council on Riveted
and Bolted Structural Joints of the Engineering Foundation. Its ‘‘Specification for
Structural Steel Joints Using A325 or A490 Bolts’’ (Table 7.1) was adopted by the
American Institute for Steel Construction. Bolts conforming to ASTM A449 are
acceptable, but their usage is restricted to bearing-type connections (Fig. 7.1) re-




FIGURE 7.1 Two main types of construction with high-strength bolts. Although, in general, no
paint is permitted on faying surfaces in slip-critical connections, the following are allowed: scored
galvanized coatings, inorganic zinc-rich paint, and metallized zinc or aluminum coatings.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                              7.9


quiring bolt diameters greater than 11⁄2 in. Furthermore, when they are required to
be tightened to more than 50% of their specified minimum tensile strength, hard-
ened steel washers should be installed under the heads.
    When high-strength bolts are used in a connection, they are highly tensioned by
tightening of the nuts and thus tightly clamp together the parts of the connection.
    For convenient computation of load capacity, the clamping force and resulting
friction are resolved as shear. Bearing between the bolt body and connected material
is not a factor until loads become large enough to cause slippage between the parts
                                             of the connection. The bolts are as-
                                             sumed to function in shear following
                                             joint slippage into full bearing.
                                                 The clamping and bearing actions
                                             lead to the dual concept: slip-critical
                                             connections and bearing-type connec-
                                             tions. For the latter, the allowable shear
                                             depends on the cross-sectional bolt area
                                             at the shear plane. Hence, two shear val-
                                             ues are assigned, one for the full body
                                             area and one for the reduced area at the
                                             threads.

                                              Identification. There is no difference
                                              in appearance of high-strength bolts in-
                                              tended for either slip-critical or bearing-
                                              type connections. To aid installers and
                                              inspectors in identifying the several
FIGURE 7.2 Identification markings on heads   available grades of steel, bolts and nuts
and nuts of high-strength bolts.              are manufactured with permanent mark-
                                              ings (Fig. 7.2).


7.3.2   High-Strength Bolt Installation

Washer requirements for high-strength bolted assemblies depend on the method of
installation and type of bolt holes in the connected elements. These requirements
are summarized in Table 7.5.

Bolt Tightening. Specifications require that all high-strength bolts be tightened to
70% of their specified minimum tensile strength, which is nearly equal to the proof
load (specified lower bound to the proportional limit) for A325 bolts, and within
10% of the proof load for A490 bolts. Tightening above these minimum tensile
values does not damage the bolts, but it is prudent to avoid excessive uncontrolled
tightening. The required minimum tension, kips, for A325 and A490 bolts is given
in Table 7.6.
   There are three methods for tightening bolts to assure the prescribed tensioning:

Turn-of-Nut. By means of a manual or powered wrench, the head or nut is turned
from an initial snug-tight position. The amount of rotation, varying from one-third
to a full turn, depends on the ratio of bolt length (underside of heat to end of point)
to bolt diameter and on the disposition of the outer surfaces of bolted parts (normal
or sloped not more than 1:20 with respect to the bolt axis). Required rotations are
7.10                                          SECTION SEVEN


TABLE 7.5 Washer Requirements for High-Strength Bolts

                                                                          A490 bolts
                                                              Base material      Base material
  Method of tensioning                      A325 bolts         Fy ⬍ 40.0*         Fy ⬎ 40.0*
Calibrated wrench                   One washer under          Two washers       One washer
                                      turned element                              under turned
                                                                                  element
Turn-of-the-nut                     None                      Two washers       One washer
                                                                                  under turned
                                                                                  element
Both methods, slotted and           Two washers               Two washers       Two washers
  oversized holes
   * Fy ⫽ specified minimum yield stress, ksi.



                                 TABLE 7.6 Minimum
                                 Tightening Tension, kips, for
                                 High-Strength Bolts

                                 Dia, in           A325       A490
                                     5
                                       ⁄8            19         24
                                     3
                                       ⁄4            28         35
                                     7
                                       ⁄8            39         49
                                    1                51         64
                                    11⁄8             56         80
                                    11⁄4             71        102
                                    13⁄8             85        121
                                    11⁄2            103        148



tabulated in the ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel Joints Using A325 of A490
Bolts.’’

Calibrated Wrench. By means of a powered wrench with automatic cutoff and
calibration on the job. Control and test are accomplished with a hydraulic device
equipped with a gage that registers the tensile stress developed.

Direct Tension Indicator. Special indicators are permitted on satisfactory dem-
onstration of performance. One example is a hardened steel washer with protrusions
on one face. The flattening that occurs on bolt tightening is measured and correlated
with the induced tension.


7.3.3   Unfinished Bolts

Known in construction circles by several names—ordinary, common, machine, or
rough—unfinished bolts are characterized chiefly by the rough appearance of the
shank. They are covered by ASTM A307. They fit into holes 1⁄16 in larger in
diameter than the nominal bolt diameter.
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                           7.11


   Unfinished bolts have relatively low load-carrying capacity. This results from
the possibility that threads might lie in shear planes. Thus, it is unnecessary to
extend the bolt body by use of washers.
   One advantage of unfinished bolts is the ease of making a connection; only a
wrench is required. On large jobs, however, erectors find they can tighten bolts
more economically with a pneumatic-powered impact wrench. Power tightening
generally yields greater uniformity of tension in the bolts and makes for a better-
balanced connection.
   While some old building codes restrict unfinished bolts to minor applications,
such as small, secondary (or intermediate) beams in floor panels and in certain parts
of one-story, shed-type buildings, the AISC specifications for structural steel build-
ings, with a basis of many years of experience, permit A307 bolts for main con-
nections on structures of substantial size. For example, these bolts may be used for
beam and girder connections to columns in buildings up to 125 ft in height.
   There is an economic relation between the strength of a fastener and that of the
base material. So while A307 may be economical for connecting steel with a 36-
ksi yield point, this type of bolt may not be economical with 50-ksi yield-point
steel. The number of fasteners to develop the latter becomes excessive and perhaps
impractical due to size of detail material.
   A307 bolts should always be considered for use, even in an otherwise all-welded
building, for minimum-type connections, such as for purlins, girts, and struts.

Locking Devices for Bolts. Unfinished bolts (ASTM A307) and interference-
body-type bolts (Art 7.3.4) usually come with American Standard threads and nuts.
Properly tightened, connections with these bolts give satisfactory service under
static loads. But when the connections are subjected to vibration or heavy dynamic
loads, a locking device is desirable to prevent the nut from loosening.
    Locking devices may be classified according to the method employed: special
threads, special nuts, special washers, and what may be described as field methods.
Instead of conventional threads, bolt may be supplied with a patented self-locking
thread called Dardelet. Sometimes, locking features are built into the nuts. Patented
devices, the Automatic-Nut, Union-Nut, and Pal-Nut, are among the common ones.
Washers may be split rings or specially touched. Field methods generally used
include checking, or distorting, the threads by jamming them with a chisel or lock-
ing by tack welding the nuts.


7.3.4   Other Bolt-Type Fasteners

Interference body of bearing-type bolts are characterized by a ribbed or inter-
rupted-ribbed shank and a button-shaped head; otherwise, including strength, they
are similar to the regular A325 high-strength bolts. The extreme diameter of the
shank is slightly larger than the diameter of the bolt hole. Consequently, the tips
of the ribs or knurlings will groove the side of the hole, assuring a tight fit. One
useful application has been in high television towers, where minimum-slippage
joints are desired with no more installation effort than manual tightening with a
spud wrench. Nuts may be secured with lock washers, self-locking nuts, or Dardelet
self-locking threads. The main disadvantage of interference body bolts is the need
for accurate matching of truly concentric holes in the members being joined; ream-
ing sometimes is necessary.
   Huckbolts are grooved (not threaded) and have an extension on the end of the
shank. When the bolt is in the hole, a hydraulic machine, similar to a bolting or
7.12                               SECTION SEVEN


riveting gun, engages the extension. The machine pulls on the bolt to develop a
high clamping force, then swages a collar into the grooved shank and snaps off the
extension, all in one quick operation.


7.3.5   Welds

Welding is used to fasten together components of a built-up member, such as a
plate girder, and to make connections between members. This technique, which
uses fusion is a controlled atmosphere, requires more highly skilled labor than does
bolting. However, because of cost advantages, welding is widely used in steel con-
struction, especially in fabricating shops where conditions are more favorable to
closely controlled procedures. When field welding is specified, the availability of
skilled welders and inspection technicians and the use of more stringent quality-
control criteria should be considered.
    Any of several welding processes may be used: manual shielded metal arc,
submerged arc, flux cored arc, gas metal arc, electrogas, and electroslag. They are
not all interchangeable, however; each has its advantageous applications.
    Many building codes accept the recommendations of the American Welding
Society ‘‘Structural Welding Code’’ (AWS D1.1) (Table 7.1). The AISC specifica-
tion incorporates many of this code’s salient requirements.

Weld Types. Practically all welds used for connecting structural steel are of either
of two types: fillet or groove.
    Figure 7.3a and b illustrates a typical fillet weld. As stated in Art. 7.27, all
stresses on fillet welds are resolved as shear on the effective throat. The normal
throat dimension, as indicated in Fig. 7.3a and b, is the effective throat for all
welding processes, except the submerged-arc method. The deep penetration char-
acteristic of the latter process is recognized by increasing the effective throat di-
mension, as shown in Fig. 7.3c.
    Groove welds (Fig. 7.3d, e, and ƒ) are classified in accordance with depth of
solid weld metal as either complete or partial penetration. Most groove welds, such
as those in Fig. 7.3d and e, are made complete-penetration welds by the workman-
ship requirements: use backup strips or remove slag inclusions and imperfections
(step called back-gouging) on the unshielded side of the root weld. The partial-
penetration groove weld shown in Fig. 7.3ƒ is typical of the type of weld used for
box-type members and column splices. Effective throat depends on the welding
process, welding position, and the chamfer angle ␣. The indicated effective throat
(Fig. 7.3ƒ) is proper for the shielded-metal-arc processes and for all welding po-
sitions. (See also Art. 7.27.)

Welding Electrodes. Specifications for all welding electrodes, promulgated by the
American Welding Society (AWS), are identified as A5.1, A5.5, A5.17, etc., de-
pending on the welding process. Electrodes for manual arc welding, often called
stick electrodes, are designated by the letter E followed by four of five digits. The
first two or three digits designate the strength level; thus, E70XX means electrodes
having a minimum tensile strength of 70.0 ksi. Allowable shear stress on the de-
positied weld metal is taken as 0.30 times the electrode strength classification; thus,
0.30 times 70 to an E70 results in an allowable stress of 21.0 ksi. The remaining
digits provide information on the intended usage, such as the particular welding
positions and types of electrode coating.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                         7.13




        FIGURE 7.3 Effective throats of fillet and groove welds.


Welding Procedures. The variables that affect the quality of a weld are controlled
by welding procedures that must be approved by the structural engineer. Specifi-
cation AWS D1.1 contains several prequalified welding procedures, the use of
which permits fabricators and erectors to avoid the need for obtaining approvals
for specific routine work. Where unusual conditions exist, the specification requires
that formal documentation be submitted for review and approval.

Base-Metal Temperatures. An important requirement in production of quality
welds is the temperature of base metal. Minimum preheat and interpass temperature
as specified by the AWS and AISC standards must be obtained within 3 inches of
the welded joint before welding starts and then maintained until completion. Table
7.7 gives the temperature requirements based on thickness (thickest part of joint)
and welding process for several structural steels. When base metal temperature is
below 32⬚F, it must be preheated to at least 70⬚ and maintained at that temperature
during welding. No welding is permitted when ambient temperature is below 0⬚F.
7.14                                      SECTION SEVEN


TABLE 7.7 Minimum Preheat and Interpass Temperatures for Base Metal to Be Welded

                                                                         Shielded-metal-arc welding
                          Shielded-metal-arc welding                    with low-hydrogen electrodes,
                         with other than low-hydrogen                   gas-metal-arc, and flux-cored
                                   electrodes                                    arc welding
       Steel*             Thickness, in           Temp, ⬚F              Thickness, in        Temp, ⬚F
A36                     To 3⁄4 in incl.               32            To 3⁄4 in incl.             32
                        Over 3⁄4 to 11⁄2             150            Over 3⁄4 to 11⁄2            50
                        Over 11⁄2 to 21⁄2            225            Over 11⁄2 to 21⁄2          150
                        Over 21⁄2                    300            Over 21⁄2                  225
A242                    Not permitted                               To 3⁄4 in incl.             32
A441                                                                Over 3⁄4 to 11⁄2            70
A588                                                                Over 11⁄2 to 21⁄2          150
A572 to Fy ⫽ 50                                                     Over 21⁄2                  225
A529
   * For temperatures for other steels, see AWS D1.1, ‘‘Structural Welding Code,’’ American Welding
Society.




Additional information, including temperature requirements for other structural
steels, is given AWS D1.1 and the AISC specifications for structural steel buildings
(Table 7.1).
   Another quality-oriented requirement applicable to fillet welds is minimum leg
size, depending on thickness of steel (Table 7.8). The thicker part connected gov-
erns, except that the weld size need not exceed the thickness of the thinner part.
This rule is intended to minimize the effects of restraint resulting from rapid cooling
due to disproportionate mass relationships.

                         TABLE 7.8 Minimum Sizes* of Fillet and
                         Partial-Penetration Welds

                         Base-metal thickness, in            Weld size, in
                             1                                      1
                         To ⁄4 incl.                                 ⁄8
                         Over 1⁄4 to 1⁄2                           1
                                                                    ⁄16
                         Over 1⁄2 to 3⁄4                           1
                                                                     ⁄4
                         Over 3⁄4 to 11⁄2                          5
                                                                    ⁄16
                         Over 11⁄2 to 21⁄2                         1
                                                                     ⁄8
                         Over 21⁄2 to 6                            1
                                                                     ⁄2
                                                                   5
                         Over 6                                      ⁄8
                             * Leg dimension for fillet welds; minimum ef-
                         fective throat for partial-penetration groove welds.




7.3.6    Inspection of Welds

The quality of welded work is highly dependent upon the close adherence to ap-
plicable welding process and procedural requirements. This, plus attention to di-
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                          7.15


mensional requirements, will generally result in serviceable welds. As a result, most
welding work incorporated in building construction, other than for major structures,
is inspected using visual inspection techniques. The fabricator’s quality personnel
are responsible for adherence to approved procedures. The owner’s inspector ob-
served the erector’s operations and may perform any necessary visual inspection of
the finished work.
    Four nondestructive testing methods are commonly used to evaluate welded
work. These are (1) magnetic-particle inspection, (2) liquid penetrant inspection,
(3) radiographic inspection, and (4) ultrasonic inspection. The latter two methods
are the most common today. Each of these nondestructive testing methods add to
the cost of construction and should be used where some special service requirement
justifies this added feature. Any such testing must be identified on the drawings or
in the specifications.


7.3.7   Fastener Symbols

Fasteners are indicated on design, shop, and field erection drawings by notes and
symbols. A simple note may suffice for bolts; for example: ‘‘7⁄8-in A325 bolts,
except as noted.’’ Welds require more explicit information, since their location is
not so obvious as that of holes for bolts.
   Symbols are standard throughout the industry. Figure 7.4 shows the symbols for
bolts, Fig. 7.5 the symbols for welds. The welding symbols (Fig. 7.5a) together
with the information key (Fig. 7.5b) are from the American Welding Society ‘‘Sym-
bols for Welding and Nondestructive Testing, AWS A2.4.


7.3.8   Erection Clearance for Fasteners

All types of fasteners require clearances for proper installation in both shop and
field. Shop connections seldom are a problem, since each member can be easily
manipulated for access. Field connections, however, require careful planning, be-
cause connections can be made only after all members to be connected are aligned




                    FIGURE 7.4 Symbols for shop and field bolts.
7.16                                SECTION SEVEN




FIGURE 7.5 Symbols for shop and field welds.



in final position. This is the responsibility of the fabricator’s engineering staff and
is discharged during the making of shop drawings. However, the basic design con-
figuration must permit the necessary clearances to be developed.
    Clearances are required for two reasons: to permit entry, as in the case of bolts
entering holes, and to provide access to the connected elements either to allow the
tightening of bolts with field tools or to permit the movement of manual electrodes
or semiautomatic welding tools in depositing weld metal.
    (‘‘Structural Steel Detailing,’’ American Institute of Steel Construction.)
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.17


7.4     FABRICATION

When considering fabrication, as well as erection of the fabricated product, the
designer must taken into account contractual matters, work by others on the con-
struction team, schedule implications of the design, and quality assurance matters.
Fortunately, there are well established aids for these considerations. Contractual
questions such as what constitutes structural steel, procedures for preparing and
approving the shop detail drawings, and standard fabrication procedures and tol-
erances are all addressed in the AISC’s Code of Standard Practice (Table 7.1).
Insights on economical connection details and the impact of material selection on
mill material deliveries are generally available from the fabricator’s engineering
staff. These engineers are also able to comment on unique erection questions.
    Quality assurance questions fall into two categories, fabrication operations and
field operations. Today, sound quality control procedures are in place in most fab-
rication shops through an AISC program which prequalifies fabricators. There are
three levels of qualification: I, II and III, with Level III being the most demanding.
Fabricators with either a Level I or Level II certification are suitable for almost all
building work.
    Most engineers incorporate the AISC’s Code of Standard Practice in their project
specification.


7.4.1   Shop Detail Drawings

Detail drawings are prepared by the fabricator to delineate to his work force the
fabrication requirements. Because each shop has certain differences in equipment
and / or procedures, the fabricator develops details which, when matched with his
processes, are the most economical. To accomplish this end, the design drawings
need to be complete, showing all structural steel requirements, and should include
design information on the forces acting at connections. Designers should avoid
specifying deck openings and beam penetrations through notes on the drawings.
This is a frequent cause of extra costs on fabrication contracts.


7.4.2   Fabrication Processes

Mill material is cut to length by sawing, shearing, or flame cutting. Columns may
also be milled to their final length. Holes for fasteners are drilled or punched.
Punched and reamed holes are seldom used in building construction. Cuts for weld
preparation, web openings, and dimensional clearances are flame cut. AISC guide-
lines for each of these processes are associated with the AISC’s fabricator pre-
qualification program. Welding for building construction is performed in accordance
with the provisions of the AWS Structural Welding Code, D1.1. Most requirements
can be satisfied using pre-qualified welding procedures.


7.5     QUALITY ASSURANCE

Concepts for improving and maintaining quality in the constructed project stress
the participation of the design professional in the project team consisting of the
7.18                               SECTION SEVEN


owner, design professional, and general contractor. While the structural engineer
plays a varying role in the major phases of a project—that is, conceptual, prelim-
inary, and final design; bidding; and construction—his or her participation is vital
to achieving the appropriate level of quality.
   Those activities of the structural engineer that have the greatest impact on quality
are materials selection, determination of workmanship quality levels, quality control
(QC) requirements, preparation of clear and complete contract documents, and re-
view of the contractor’s work. One aspect of the last item that is particularly im-
portant in steel construction is the review and approval of the fabricator’s shop
drawings. Because the fabricator’s engineers design connections to meet the criteria
provided by the design professional, the review and approval process must assure
that connection designs and details are compatible with the intent and requirements
of the basic design.
   (‘‘Quality in the Constructed Project,’’ American Society of Civil Engineers.)



STRUCTURAL FRAMING SYSTEMS

Steel construction may be classified into three board categories: wall-bearing, skel-
eton, and long-span framing. Depending on the needs of the building, one or more
of these categories may be incorporated.
   In addition to the main building elements—floors, roofs, walls—the structural
system must include bracing members that provide lateral support for main mem-
bers as well as for other bracing members, resistance to lateral loads on the building,
redundant load paths, and stiffness to the structure limit deflections. An economical
and safe design properly integrates these systems into a completed structure.



7.6    WALL-BEARING FRAMING

Probably the oldest and commonest type of framing, wall-bearing (not to be con-
fused with bearing-wall construction), occurs whenever a wall of a building, interior
or exterior, is used to support ends of main structural elements carrying roof or
floor loads. The walls must be strong enough to carry the reaction from the sup-
ported members and thick enough to ensure stability against any horizontal forces
that may be imposed. Such construction often is limited to relatively low structures,
because load-bearing walls become massive in tall structures. Nevertheless, a wall-
bearing system may be advantageous for tall buildings when designed with rein-
forcing steel.
    A common application of wall-bearing construction may be found in many
single-family homes. A steel beam, usually 8 or 10 in deep, is used to carry the
interior walls and floor loads across the basement with no intermediate supports,
the ends of the beam being supported on the foundation walls. The relatively shal-
low beam depth affords maximum headroom for the span. In some cases, the spans
may be so large that an intermediate support becomes necessary to minimize de-
flection. Usually a steel pipe column serves this purpose.
    Another example of wall-bearing framing is the member used to support ma-
sonry over windows, doors, and other openings in a wall. Such members, called
lintels, may be a steel angle section (commonly used for brick walls in residences)
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                         7.19




               FIGURE 7.6 Lintels supporting masonry.



or, on longer spans and for heavier walls, a fabricated assembly. A variety of
frequently used types is shown in Fig. 7.6. In types b, c, and e, a continuous plate
is used to close the bottom, or soffit, of the lintel, and to join the load-carrying
beams and channels into a single shipping unit. The gap between the toes of the
channel flanges in type d may be covered by a door frame or window trim, to be
installed later. Pipe and bolt separators are used to hold the two channels together
to form a single member for handling.

Bearing Plates. Because of low allowable pressures on masonry, bearing plates
(sometimes called masonry plates) are usually required under the ends of all beams
that rest on masonry walls, as illustrated in Fig. 7.7. Even when the pressure on
the wall under a member is such that an area no greater than the contact portion
of the member itself is required, wall plates are sometimes prescribed, if the mem-
ber is of such weight that it must be set by the steel erector. The plates, shipped
loose and in advance of steel erection, are then set by the mason to provide a
satisfactory seat at the proper elevation.

Anchors. The beams are usually anchored to the masonry. Government anchors,
as illustrated in Fig. 7.7, are generally preferred.

Nonresidential Uses. Another common application for the wall-bearing system is
in one-story commercial and light industrial-type construction. The masonry side
walls support the roof system, which may be rolled beams, open-web joists, or light
7.20                               SECTION SEVEN




                       FIGURE 7.7 Wall-bearing beam.



trusses. Clear spans of moderate size are usually economical, but for longer spans
(probably over 40 ft), wall thickness and size of buttresses (pilasters) must be built
to certain specified minimum proportions commensurate with the span—a require-
ment of building codes to assure stability. Therefore, the economical aspect should
be carefully investigated. It may cost less to introduce steel columns and keep wall
size to the minimum permissable. On the other hand, it may be feasible to reduce
the span by introducing intermediate columns and still retain the wall-bearing sys-
tem for the outer end reactions.

Planning for Erection. One disadvantage of wall-bearing construction needs em-
phasizing: Before steel can be set by the ironworkers, the masonry must be built
up to the proper elevation to receive it. When these elevations vary, as is the case
at the end of a pitched or arched roof, then it may be necessary to proceed in
alternate stages, progress of erection being interrupted by the work that must be
performed by the masons, and vice versa. The necessary timing to avoid delays is
seldom obtained. A few columns or an additional rigid frame at the end of a build-
ing may cost less than using trades to fit an intermittent and expensive schedule.
Remember, too, that labor-union regulations may prevent the trades from handling
any material other than that belonging to their own craft. An economical rule may
well be: Lay out the work so that the erector and ironworkers can place and connect
all the steelwork in one continuous operation.
    (F. S. Merritt and R. Brockenbrough, ‘‘Structural Steel Designers Handbook,’’
2d ed., McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.)


7.7    SKELETON FRAMING

In skeleton framing all the gravity loadings of the structure, including the walls are
supported by the steel framework. Such walls are termed nonbearing or curtain
walls. This system made the skyscraper possible. Steel, being so much stronger
               STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                       7.21




FIGURE 7.8 Typical beam-and-column steel framing, shown in plan.




FIGURE 7.9 Typical steel spandrel beams.
7.22                               SECTION SEVEN


than all forms of masonry, is capable of sustaining far greater load in a given space,
thus obstructing less of the floor area in performing its function.
    With columns properly spaced to provide support for the beams spanning be-
tween them, there is no limit to the floor and roof area that can be constructed with
this type of framing, merely by duplicating the details for a single bay. Erected tier
upon tier, this type of framing can be built to any desired height. Fabricators refer
to this type of construction as ‘‘beam and column.’’ A typical arrangement is illus-
trated in Fig. 7.8.
    The spandrel beams, marked B1 in Fig. 7.8, are located in or under the wall so
as to reduce eccentricity caused by wall loads. Figure 7.9 shows two methods for
connecting to the spandrel beam the shelf angle that supports the outer course of
masonry over window openings 6 ft or more in width. In order that the masonry
contractor may proceed expeditiously with the work, these shelf angles must be in
alignment with the face of the building and at the proper elevation to match a
masonry joint. The connection of the angles to the spandrel beams is made by
bolting; shims are provided to make the adjustments for line and elevation.
    Figure 7.9a illustrates a typical connection arrangement when the outstanding
leg of the shelf angle is about 3 in or less below the bottom flange of the spandrel
beam; Fig. 7.9b illustrates the corresponding arrangement when the outstanding leg
of the shelf angle is more than about 3 in below the bottom flange of the spandrel
beam. In the cases represented by Fig. 7.9b, the shelf angles are usually shipped
attached to the spandrel beam. If the distance from the bottom flange to the hori-
zontal leg of the shelf angle is greater than 10 in, a hanger may be required.
    In some cases, as over door openings, the accurate adjustment features provided
by Fig. 7.9a and b may not be needed. It may then be more economical to simplify
the detail, as shown in Fig. 7.9c. The elevation and alignment will then conform
to the permissible tolerances associated with the steel framework.
    (E. H. Gaylord, Jr., et al., ‘‘Design of Steel Structures,’’ 3rd ed.; R. L. Brock-
enbrough and F. S. Merritt, ‘‘Structural Steel Designers Handbook,’’ 2d ed.,
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.)


7.8    LONG-SPAN FRAMING

Large industrial buildings, auditoriums, gymnasiums, theaters, hangars, and expo-
sition buildings require much greater clear distance between supports than can be
supplied by beam and column framing. When the clear distance is greater than can
be spanned with rolled beams, several alternatives are available. These may be
classified as girders, simple trusses, arches, rigid frames, cantilever-suspension
spans, and various types of space frames, such as folded plates, curvilinear grids,
thin-shell domes, two-way trusses, and cable networks.
    Girders are the usual choice where depths are limited, as over large unobstructed
areas in the lower floors of tall buildings, where column loads from floors above
must be carried across the clear area. Sometimes, when greater strength is required
than is available in rolled beams, cover plates are added to the flanges (Fig. 7.10a)
to provide the additional strength.
    When depths exceed the limit for rolled beams, i.e., for spans exceeding about
67 ft (based on the assumption of a depth-span ratio of 1:22 with 36-in-deep Ws),
the girder must be built up from plates and shapes. Welded girders are used instead
of the old-type conventional riveted girds (Fig. 7.10b), composed of web plate,
angles, and cover plates.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.23

                                                Welded girders generally are com-
                                             posed of three plates (Fig. 7.10c). This
                                             type offers the most opportunity for sim-
                                             ple fabrication, efficient use of material,
                                             and least weight. Top and bottom flange
                                             plates may be of different size (Fig.
                                             7.10d ), an arrangement advantageous in
                                             composite construction, which inte-
                                             grates a concrete floor slab with the
                                             girder flange, to function together.
                                                Heavy girders may use cover-plated
                                             tee sections (Fig. 7.10e). Where lateral
                                             loads are a factor, as in the case of gird-
                                             ers supporting cranes, a channel may be
                                             fastened to the top flange (Fig. 7.10ƒ).
                                             In exceptionally heavy construction, it is
                                             not unusual to use a pair of girders dia-
                                             phragmed together to share the load
                                             (Fig. 7.10g).
                                                The availability of high-strength,
FIGURE 7.10 Typical built-up girders.        weldable steels resulted in development
                                             of hybrid girders. For example, a high-
strength steel, say A572 Grade 50, whose yield stress is 50 ksi, may be used in a
girder for the most highly stressed flanges, and the lower-priced A36 steel, whose
yield stress is 36 ksi, may be used for lightly stressed flanges and web plate and
detail material. The AISC specification for allowable-stress design requires that the
top and bottom flanges at any cross section have the same cross-sectional area, and
that the steel in these flanges be of the same grade. The allowable bending stress
may be slightly less than that for conventional homogeneous girders of the high-
strength steel, to compensate for possible overstress in the web at the junction with
the flanges. Hybrid girders are efficient and economical for heavy loading and long
spans and, consequently, are frequently employed in bridgework.

Trusses. When depth limits permit, a more economical way of spanning long
distances is with trusses, for both floor and roof construction. Because of their
greater depth, trusses usually provide greater stiffness against deflection when com-
pared pound for pound with the corresponding rolled beam or plate girder that
otherwise would be required. Six general types of trusses frequently used in build-
ing frames are shown in Fig. 7.11 together with modifications that can be made to
suit particular conditions.
    Trusses in Fig. 7.11a to d and k may be used as the principal supporting mem-
bers in floor and roof framing. Types e to j serve a similar function in the framing
of symmetrical roofs having a pronounced pitch. As shown, types a to d have a
top chord that is not quite parallel to the bottom chord. Such an arrangement is
used to provide for drainage of flat roofs. Most of the connections of the roof
beams (purlins), which these trusses support, can be identical, which would not be
the case if the top chord were dead level and the elevation of the purlins varied.
When used in floors, truss types a to d have parallel chords.
    Properly proportioned, bow string trusses (Fig. 7.11j) have the unique charac-
teristic that the stress in their web members is relatively small. The top chord,
which usually is formed in the arc of a circle, is stressed in compression, and the
bottom chord is stressed in tension. In spite of the relatively expensive operation
7.24                               SECTION SEVEN




          FIGURE 7.11 Types of steel trusses.



of forming the top chord, this type of truss has proved very popular in roof framing
on spans of moderate lengths up to about 100 ft.
   The Vierendeel truss (Fig. 7.11k) generally is shop welded to the extent possible
to develop full rigidity of connections between the verticals and chords. It is useful
where absence of diagonals is desirable to permit passage between the verticals.
   Trusses also may be used for long spans, as three-dimensional trusses (space
frames) or as grids. In two-way girds, one set of parallel lines of trusses is inter-
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                           7.25


sected at 90⬚ by another set of trusses so that the verticals are common to both
sets. Because of the rigid connections at the intersections, loads are distributed
nearly equally to all trusses. Reduced truss depth and weight savings are among
the apparent advantages of such grids.
   Long-span joists are light trusses closely spaced to support floors and flat roofs.
They conform to standard specifications (Table 7.1) and to standard loading. Both
Pratt and Warren types are used, the shape of chords and webs varying with the
fabricator. Yet, all joists with the same designation have the same guaranteed load-
supporting capacity. The standard loading tables list allowable loads for joists up
to 72 in deep and with clear span up to 144 ft. The joists may have parallel or
sloping chords or other configuration.

Truss Applications. Cross sections through a number of buildings having roof
trusses of the general type just discussed are shown diagrammatically in Fig. 7.12.
Cross section a might be that of a storage building or a light industrial building. A
Fink truss provides a substantial roof slope. Roofs of this type are often designed




         FIGURE 7.12 Some examples of structures with truss roofs.
7.26                                 SECTION SEVEN


to carry little loading, if any, except that produced by wind and snow, since the
contents of the building are supported on the ground floor. For light construction,
the roof and exterior wall covering may consist of thin, cold-formed metal panels.
Lighting and ventilation, in addition to that provided by windows in the vertical
side walls, frequently are furnished by means of sash installed in the vertical side
of a continuous monitor, framing for which is indicated by the dotted lines in the
sketch.
   Cross section b shows a scissors truss supporting the high roof over the nave of
a church. This type of truss is used only when the roof pitch is steep, as in eccle-
siastical architecture.
   A modified Warren truss, shown in cross section c, might be one of the main
supporting roof members over an auditorium, gymnasium, theater, or other assem-
bly-type building where large, unobstructed floor space is required. Similar trusses,
including modified Pratt, are used in the roofs of large garages, terminal buildings,
and airplane hangars, for spans ranging from about 80 up to 500 ft.
   The Pratt truss (Fig. 7.12d ) is frequently used in industrial buildings, while e
depicts a type of framing often used where overhead traveling cranes handle heavy
loads from one point on the ground to another.

Arches. When very large clear spans are needed, the bent framing required to
support walls and roof may take the form of solid or open-web arches, of the kind
shown in Fig. 7.13. A notable feature of bents a and b is the heavy steel pins at
points A, B, and C, connecting the two halves of the arch together at the crown
and supporting them at the foundation. These pines are designed to carry all the
reaction from each half arch, and to function in shear and bearing much as a single
bolt is assumed to perform when loaded in double shear.
    Use of hinge pins offers two advantages in long-span frames of the type shown
in Fig. 7.13. In the first place, they simplify design calculations. Second, they
simplify erection. All the careful fitting can be done and strong connections required
to develop the needed strength at the ends of the arch can be made in the shop,
instead of high above ground in the field. When these heavy members have been
raised in the field about in their final position, the upper end of each arch is adjusted,
upward or downward, by means of jacks near the free end of the arch. When the
holes in the pin plates line up exactly, the crown pins is slipped in place and secured
against falling out by the attachment of keeper plates. The arch is then ready to
carry its loading. Bents of the type shown in Fig. 7.13a and b are referred to as
three-hinged arches.
    When ground conditions are favorable and foundations are properly designed,
and if the loads to be carried are relatively light, as, for example, for a large
gymnasium, a hingeless arch similar to the one shown diagrammatically in Fig.
7.13c may offer advantage in overall economy.
    In many cases, the arches shown in Fig. 7.13a and b are designed without the
pins at B (two-hinged arch). Then, the section at B must be capable of carrying
the moment and shear present. Therefore, the section at B may be heavier than for
the three-hinged arch, and erection will be more exacting for correct closure.

Rigid Frames. These are another type of long-span bent. In design, the stiffness
afforded by beam-to-column connections is carefully evaluated and counted on in
the design to relieve some of the bending moment that otherwise would be assumed
as occurring with maximum intensity at midspan. Typical examples of rigid frame
bents are shown in Fig. 7.14. When complete assembled in place in the field, the
                           STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                        7.27




   FIGURE 7.13 Steel arches: (a) and (b) three-hinged; (c) fixed.



frames are fully continuous throughout their entire length and height. A distinguish-
ing characteristic of rigid frames is the absence of pins or hinges at the crown, or
midspan.
   In principle, single-span rigid-frame bents are either two-hinged or hingeless
arches. For hingeless arches, the column bases are fully restrained by large rigid
foundations, to which they are attached by a connection capable of transmitting
moment as well as shear. Since such foundations may not be economical or even
possible when soil conditions are not favorable, the usual practice is to consider
the bents hinged at each reaction. However, this does not imply the necessity of
expensive pin details; in most cases, sufficient rotation of the column base can be
obtained with the ordinary flat-ended base detail and a single line of anchor bolts
7.28                                SECTION SEVEN




        FIGURE 7.14 Steel rigid frames: (a) single bent; (b) continuous frame with
        underfloor tie; (c) connection of tie to a column; (d ) with two-hinged.



placed perpendicular to the span on the column center line. Many designers prefer
to obtain a hinge effect by concentrating the column load on a narrow bar, as shown
in Fig. 7.14c; this refinement is worthwhile in larger spans.
   Regardless of how the frame is hinged, there is a problem in resisting the hor-
izontal shear that the rigid frame imparts to the foundation. For small spans and
light thrusts, it may be feasible to depend on the foundation to resist lateral dis-
placement. However, more positive performance and also reduction in costs are
usually obtained by connecting opposite columns of a frame with tie rods, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 7.14b, thus eliminating these horizontal forces from the foundation.
   For ties on small spans, it may be possible to utilize the reinforcing bars in the
floor slab or floor beams, by simply connecting them to the column bases. On
larger spans, it is advisable to use tie rods and turnbuckles, the latter affording the
opportunity to prestress the ties and thus compensate for elastic elongation of the
rods when stressed. Prestressing the rod during erection to 50% of its value has
been recommended for some major installations; but the foundations should be
checked for resisting some portion of the thrust.
   Single-story, welded rigid frames often are chosen where exposed steelwork is
desired for such structures as churches, gymnasiums, auditoriums, bowling alleys,
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                             7.29


and shopping centers, because of attractive appearance and economy. Columns may
be tapered, girders may vary in depth linearly or parabolically, haunches (knees)
may be curved, field joints may be made inconspicuous, and stiffness may simply
be plates.

Field Splices. One problem associated with long-span construction is that of lo-
cating field splices compatible with the maximum sizes of members that can be
shipped and erected. Field splices in frames are generally located at or near the
point of counterflexure, thus reducing the splicing material to a minimum. In gen-
eral, the maximum height for shipping by truck is 8 ft, by rail 10 ft. Greater overall
depths are possible, but these should always be checked with the carrier; they vary
with clearances under bridges and through tunnels.
   Individual shipping pieces must be stiff enough to be handled without buckling
or other injury, light enough to be lifted by the raising equipment, and capable of
erection without interference from other parts of the framework. This suggests a
study of the entire frame to ensure orderly erection, and to make provisions for
temporary bracing of the members, to prevent jackknifing, and for temporary guying
of the frame, to obtain proper alignment.

Hung-Span Beams. In some large one-story buildings, an arrangement of canti-
lever-suspension (hung) spans (Fig. 7.15) has proved economical and highly effi-
cient. This layout was made so as to obtain equal maximum moments, both negative
and positive, for the condition of uniform load on all spans. A minimum of three
spans is required; that is, a combination of two end spans (A) and one intermediate
span (C). The connection at the end of the cantilever (point D) must be designed
as a shear connection only. If the connection is capable of transmitting moment as
well as shear, it will change the design to one of continuity and the dimensions in
Fig. 7.15 will not apply. This scheme of cantilever and suspended spans is not
necessarily limited to one-story buildings.
   As a rule, interior columns are separate elements in each story. Therefore, hor-
izontal forces on the building must be taken solely by the exterior columns.
   (E. H. Gaylord, Jr., et al., ‘‘Design of Steel Structures,’’ 3d ed.; and F. S. Merritt
and R. L. Brockenbrough, ‘‘Structural Steel Designer’s Handbook,’’ 2d ed.,
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, New York.)




             FIGURE 7.15 Hung- or suspended-span steel construction.



7.9   STEEL AND CONCRETE FRAMING

In another type of framing system, different from those described in Arts. 7.7 and
7.8, a partial use of structural steel has an important role, namely, composite fram-
ing of reinforced concrete and structural steel.
7.30                                SECTION SEVEN


   Composite construction actually occurs whenever concrete is made to assist steel
framing in carrying loads. The term composite, however, often is used for the
specific cases in which concrete slabs act together with flexural members.
   Reinforced-concrete columns of conventional materials when employed in tall
buildings and for large spans become excessively large. One method of avoiding
this objectionable condition is to use high-strength concrete and high-strength re-
inforcing bars. Another is to use a structural-steel column core. In principle, the
column load is carried by both the steel column and the concrete that surrounds
the steel shape. Building codes usually contain an appropriate formula for this
condition.
   A number of systems employ a combination of concrete and steel in various
ways. One method features steel columns supporting a concrete floor system by
means of a steel shearhead connected to the columns at each floor level. The shal-
low grillage is embedded in the floor slab, thus obtaining a smooth ceiling without
drops or capitals.
   Another combination system is the lift-slab method. In this system, the floor
slabs are cast one on top of another at ground level. Jacks, placed on the permanent
steel columns, raise the slabs, one by one, to their final elevation, where they are
made secure to the columns. When fireproofing is required, the columns may be
boxed in with any one of many noncombustible materials available for that purpose.
The merit of this system is the elimination of formwork and shoring that are es-
sential in conventional reinforced-concrete construction.
   For high-rise buildings, structural-steel framing often is used around a central,
load-bearing, concrete core, which contains elevators, stairways, and services. The
thick walls of the core, whose tubular configuration may be circular, square, or
rectangular, are designed as shear walls to resist all the wind forces as well as
gravity loads. Sometimes, the surrounding steel framing is cantilivered from the
core, or the perimeter members are hung from trusses or girders atop the core and
possibly also, in very tall buildings, at midheight of the core.


FRAME AND MEMBER BRACING SYSTEMS

7.10   BRACING DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

Bracing as it applies to steel structures includes secondary members incorporated
into the system of main members to serve these principal functions:
    1. Slender compression members, such as columns, beams, and truss elements
are braced, or laterally supported, so as to restrain the tendency to buckle in a
direction normal to the stress path. The rigidity, or resistance to buckling, of an
individual member is determined from its length and certain physical properties of
its cross section. Economy and size usually determine whether bracing is to be
employed.
    2. Since most structures are assemblies of vertical and horizontal members form-
ing rectangular (or square) panels, they possess little inherent rigidity. Consequently,
additional rigidity must be supplied by a secondary system of members or by rigid
or semi-rigid joints between members. This is particularly necessary when the
framework is subject to lateral loads, such as wind, earthquakes, and moving loads.
Exempt from this second functional need for bracing are trusses, which are basically
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.31


an arrangement of triangles possessing in their planes an inherent ideal rigidity both
individually and collectively.
   3. There frequently is a need for bracing to resist erection loads and to align or
prevent overturning, in a direction normal to their planes, of trusses, bents, or frames
during erection. Such bracing may be temporary; however, usually bracing needed
for erection is also useful in supplying rigidity to the structure and therefore is
permanently incorporated into the building. For example, braces that tie together
adjoining trusses and prevent their overturning during erection are useful to prevent
sway—even though the swaying forces may not be calculable.



7.11   FRAME BRACING

Design of bracing to resist forces induced by wind, seismic disturbances, and mov-
ing loads, such as those caused by cranes, is not unlike, in principle, design of
members that support vertical dead and live loads. These lateral forces are readily
calculable. They are collected at points of application and then distributed through
the structural system and delivered to the ground. Wind loads, for example, are
collected at each floor level and distributed to the columns that are selected to
participate in the system. Such loads are cumulative; that is, columns resisting wind
shears must support at any floor level all the wind loads on the floors above the
one in consideration.


                                             7.11.1   Bracing Tall Buildings

                                             If the steel frame of the multistory
                                             building in Fig. 7.16a is subjected to lat-
                                             eral wind load, it will distort as shown
                                             in Fig. 7.16b, if the connections of col-
                                             umns and beams are of the standard
                                             type, for which rigidity (resistance to ro-
                                             tation) is nil. One can visualize this
                                             readily by assuming each joint is con-
                                             nected with a single pin. Naturally, the
                                             simplest method to prevent this distor-
                                             tion is to insert diagonal members—
                                             triangles being inherently rigid, even if
                                             all the members forming the triangles
FIGURE 7.16 Wind bracing for multistory      are pin-connected.
buildings.
Braced Bents. Bracing of the type in Fig. 7.16c, called X bracing, is both efficient
and economical. Unfortunately, X bracing is usually impracticable because of in-
terference with doors, windows, and clearance between floor and ceiling. Usually,
for office buildings large column-free areas are required. This offers flexibility of
space use, with movable partitions. But about the only place for X bracing in this
type of building is in the elevator shaft, fire tower, or wherever a windowless wall
is required. As a result, additional bracing must be supplied by other methods. On
the other hand, X bracing is used extensively for bracing industrial buildings of the
shed or mill type.
7.32                               SECTION SEVEN


Moment-Resisting Frames. Designers have a choice of several alternatives to X
bracing. Knee braces, shown in Fig. 7.16d, or portal frames, shown in Fig. 7.16e,
may be used in outer walls, where they are likely to interfere only with windows.
For buildings with window walls, the bracing often used is the bracket type (Fig.
7.16ƒ). It simply develops the end connection for the calculated wind moment.
Connections vary in type, depending on size of members, magnitude of wind mo-
ment, and compactness needed to comply with floor-to-ceiling clearances.
    Figure 7.17 illustrates a number of bracket-type wind-braced connections. The
minimum type, represented in Fig. 7.17e, consists of angles top and bottom: They
are ample for moderate-height buildings. Usually the outstanding leg (against the
column) is of a size that permits only one gage line. A second line of fasteners
would not be effective because of the eccentricity. When greater moment resistance
is needed, the type shown in Fig. 7.17b should be considered. This is the type that
has become rather conventional in field-bolted construction. Figure 7.17c illustrates
the maximum size with beam stubs having flange widths that permit additional
gage lines, as shown. It is thus possible on larger wide-flange columns to obtain
16 fasteners in the stub-to-column connection.
    The resisting moment of a given connection varies with the distance between
centroids of the top and bottom connection piece. To increase this distance, thus
increasing the moment, an auxiliary beam may be introduced as shown in Fig.
7.17d, if it does not create an interference.




FIGURE 7.17 Typical wind connections for beams to columns.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.33


    All the foregoing types may be of welded construction, rather than bolted. In
fact, it is not unusual to find mixtures of both because of the fabricator’s decision
to shop-bolt and field-weld, or vice versa. Welding, however, has much to offer in
simplifying details and saving weight, as illustrated in Fig. 7.17e, ƒ, and g. The
last represents the ultimate efficiency with respect to weight saving, and further-
more, it eliminates interfering details.
    Deep wing brackets (Fig. 7.17h and i) are sometimes used for wall beams and
spandrels designed to take wind stresses. Such deep brackets are, of course, ac-
ceptable for interior beam bracing whenever the brackets do not interfere with
required clearances.
    Not all beams need to wind-braced in tall buildings. Usually the wind load is
concentrated on certain column lines, called bents, and the forces are carried
through the bents to the ground. For example, in a wing of a building, it is possible
to concentrate the wind load on the outermost bent. To do so may require a stiff
floor or diaphragm-like system capable of distributing the wind loads laterally. One-
half these loads may be transmitted to the outer bent, and one-half to the main
building to which the wing connects.
    Braced bents are invariably necessary across the narrow dimension of a building.
The question arises as to the amount of bracing required in the long dimension,
since wind of equal unit intensity is assumed to act on all exposed faces of struc-
tures. In buildings of square or near square proportions, it is likely that braced bents
will be provided in both directions. In buildings having a relatively long dimension,
as compared with width, the need for bracing diminishes. In fact, in many instances,
wind loads are distributed over so many columns that the inherent rigidity of the
whole system is sufficient to preclude the necessity of additional bracing.
    Column-to-column joints are treated differently for wind loads. Columns are
compression members and transmit their loads, from section above to section below,
by direct bearing between finished ends. It is not likely, in the average building,
for the tensile stresses induced by wind loads ever to exceed the compressive pres-
sure due to dead loads. Consequently, there is no theoretical need for bracing a
column joint. Actually, however, column joints are connected together with nominal
splice plates for practical considerations—to tie the columns during erection and
to obtain vertical alignment.
    This does not mean that designers may always ignore the adequacy of column
splices. In lightly loaded structures, or in exceptionally tall but narrow buildings,
it is possible for the horizontal wind forces to cause a net uplift in the windward
column because of the overturning action. The commonly used column splices
should then be checked for their capacity to resist the maximum net tensile stresses
caused in the column flanges. This computation and possible heaving up of the
splice material may not be thought of as bracing; yet, in principle, the column joint
is being ‘‘wind-braced’’ in a manner similar to the wind-braced floor-beam con-
nections.


7.11.2   Shear Walls

Masonary walls enveloping a steel frame, interior masonry walls, and perhaps some
stiff partitions can resist a substantial amount of lateral load. Rigid floor systems
participate in lateral-force distribution by distributing the shears induced at each
floor level to the columns and walls. Yet, it is common design practice to carry
wind loads on the steel frame, little or no credit being given to the substantial
resistance rendered by the floors and walls. In the past, some engineers deviated
from this conversatism by assigning a portion of the wind loads to the floors and
7.34                                SECTION SEVEN


walls; nevertheless, the steel frame carried the major share. When walls of glass or
thin metallic curtain walls, lightweight floors, and removable partitions are used,
this construction imposes on the steel frame almost complete responsibility for
transmittal of wind loads to the ground. Consequently, windbracing is critical for
tall steel structures.
    In tall, slender buildings, such as hotels and apartments with partitions, the
cracking of rigid-type partitions is related to the wracking action of the frame
caused by excessive deflection. One remedy that may be used for exceptionally
slender frames (those most likely to deflect excessively) is to supplement the normal
bracing of the steel frame with shear walls. Acting as vertical cantilevers in resisting
lateral forces, these walls, often constructed of reinforced concrete, may be arranged
much like structural shapes, such as plates, channels, Ts, Is, or Hs. (See also Arts.
3.2.4 and 5.12.) Walls needed for fire towers, elevator shafts, divisional walls, etc.,
may be extended and reinforced to serve as shear walls, and may relieve the steel
frame of cumbersome bracing or avoid uneconomical proportions.


7.11.3   Bracing Industrial-Type Buildings

Bracing of low industrial buildings for horizontal forces presents fewer difficulties
than bracing of multistory buildings, because the designer usually is virtually free
                                            to select the most efficient bracing with-
                                            out regard to architectural considera-
                                            tions or interferences. For this reason,
                                            conventional X bracing is widely
                                            used—but not exclusively. Knee braces,
                                            struts, and sway frames are used where
                                            needed.
                                                Wind forces acting on the frame
                                            shown in Fig. 7.18a, with hinged joints
                                            at the top and bottom of supporting col-
                                            umns, would cause collapse as indicated
                                            in Fig. 7.18b. In practice, the joints
                                            would not be hinged. However, a mini-
                                            mum-type connection at the truss con-
                                            nection and a conventional column base
                                            with anchor bolts located on the axis
                                            transverse to the frame would approxi-
                                            mate this theoretical consideration of
                                            hinged joints. Therefore, the structure
                                            requires bracing capable of preventing
FIGURE 7.18 Relative stiffness of bents de- collapse or unacceptable deflection.
pends on restraints on columns.                 In the usual case, the connection be-
                                            tween truss and columns will be stiff-
ened by means of knee braces (Fig. 7.18c). The rigidity so obtained may be sup-
plemented by providing partial rigidity at the column base by simply locating the
anchor bolts in the plane of the bent.
    In buildings containing overhead cranes, the knee braced may interfere with
crane operation. Then, the interference may be eliminated by fully anchoring the
column base so that the column may function as a vertical cantilever (Fig. 7.18d ).
    The method often used for very heavy industrial buildings is to obtain substantial
rigidity at both ends of the column so that the behavior under lateral load will
                           STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                             7.35


resemble the condition illustrated in Fig. 7.18e. In both (d ) and (e), the footings
must be designed for such moments.
                                                  A common assumption in wind dis-
                                              tribution for the type of light mill build-
                                              ing shown in Fig. 7.19 is that the wind-
                                              ward columns take a large share of the
                                              load acting on the side of the building
                                              and deliver the load directly to the
                                              ground. The remaining wind load on the
                                              side is delivered by the same columns
                                              to the roof systems, where the load joins
                                              with the wind forces imposed directly
                                              on the roof surface. Then, by means of
                                              diagonal X bracing, working in con-
FIGURE 7.19 Braced bays in framing for an junction with the struts and top chords
industrial building.                          of the trusses, the load is carried to the
                                              eave struts, thence to the gables and,
through diagonal bracing, to the foundations.
    Because wind may blow from any direction, the building also must be braced
for the wind load on the gables. This bracing becomes less important as the building
increases in length and conceivably could be omitted in exceptionally long struc-
tures. The stress path is not unlike that assumed for the transverse wind forces. The
load generated on the ends is picked up by the roof system and side framing,
delivered to the eave struts, and then transmitted by the diagonals in the end
sidewall bays to the foundation.
    No distribution rule for bracing is intended in this discussion; bracing can be
designed many different ways. Whereas the foregoing method would be sufficient
for a small building, a more elaborate treatment may be required for larger struc-
tures.
    Braced bays, or towers, are usually favored for structures such as that shown in
Fig. 7.20. There, a pair of transverse bents are connected together with X bracing
in the plane of the columns, plane of truss bottom chords, plane of truss top chords,
and by means of struts and sway frames. It is assumed that each such tower can
carry the wind load from adjacent bents, the number depending on assumed rigid-




FIGURE 7.20 Braced bays in a one-story building transmit wind loads to the ground.
7.36                               SECTION SEVEN


ities, size, span, and also on sound judgment. Usually every third or fourth bent
should become a braced bay. Participation of bents adjoining the braced bay can
be assured by insertion of bracing designated ‘‘intermediate’’ in Fig. 7.20b. This
bracing is of greater importance when knee braces between trusses and columns
cannot be used. When maximum lateral stiffness of intermediate bents is desired,
it can be obtained by extending the X bracing across the span; this is shown with
broken lines in Fig. 7.20b.
    Buildings with flat or low-pitched roofs, shown in Fig. 7.12d and e, require little
bracing because the trusses are framed into the columns. These columns are de-
signed for the heavy moments induced by wind pressure against the building side.
The bracing that would be provided, at most, would consist of X bracing in the
plane of the bottom chords for purpose of alignment during erection and a line or
two of sway frames for longitudinal rigidity. Alignment bracing is left in the struc-
ture since it affords a secondary system for distributing wind loads.


7.11.4   Bracing Craneway Structures

All building framing affected by overhead cranes should be braced for the thrusts
induced by sidesway and longitudinal motions of the cranes. Bracing used for wind
or erection may be assumed to sustain the lateral crane loadings. These forces are
usually concentrated on one bent. Therefore, normal good practice dictates that
adjoining bents share in the distribution. Most effective is a system of X bracing
located in the plane of the bottom chords of the roof trusses.
    In addition, the bottom chords should be investigated for possible compression,
although the chords normally are tension members. A heavily loaded crane is apt
to draw the columns together, conceivably exerting a greater compression stress
than the tension stress obtainable under dead load alone. This may indicate the need
for intermediate bracing of the bottom chord.


7.11.5   Bracing Rigid Frames

Rigid frames of the type shown in Fig. 7.14 have enjoyed popular usage for gym-
nasiums, auditoriums, mess halls, and with increasing frequency, industrial build-
ings. The stiff knees at the junction of the column with the rafter imparts excellent
transverse rigidity. Each bent is capable of delivering its share of wind load directly
to the footings. Nevertheless, some bracing is advisable, particularly for resisting
wind loads against the end of the building. Most designers emphasize the impor-
tance of an adequate eave strut; it usually is arranged so as to brace the inside
flange (compression) of the frame knee, the connection being located at the mid-
point of the transition between column and rafter segments of the frame. Interme-
diate X bracing in the plane of the rafters usually is omitted.



7.12     BRACING FOR INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS

For an ideally straight, exactly concentrically loaded beam or column, only a small
force may be needed from an intermediate brace to reduce the unbraced length of
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.37


a column or the unsupported length of the compression flange of a beam. But there
is no generally accepted method of calculating that force.
    The principal function of a brace is to provide a node in the buckled configu-
ration. Hence, rigidity is the main requirement for the brace. But actual members
do contain nonuniform residual stresses and slight initial crookedness and may be
slightly misaligned, and these eccentricities create deformations that must be re-
sisted by the brace.
    A rule used by some designers that has proved satisfactory is to design the brace
for 2% of the axial load of columns, or 2% of the total compressive stress in beam
flanges. Studies and experimental evidence indicate that this rule is conservative.


7.12.1   Column Bracing

Interior columns of a multistory building are seldom braced between floor connec-
tions. Bracing of any kind generally interferes with occupancy requirements and
architectural considerations. Since the slenderness ratio l / r in the weak direction
usually controls column size, greatest economy is achieved by using only wide-
flange column sections or similar built-up sections.
    It is frequently possible to reduce the size of wall columns by introducing knee
braces or struts in the plane of the wall, or by taking advantage of deep spandrels
or girts that may be otherwise required. Thus the slenderness ratio of the weak and
strong axis can be brought into approximate balance. The saving in column weight
may not always be justified; one must take into account the weight of additional
bracing and cost of extra details.
    Column bracing is prevalent in industrial buildings because greater vertical clear-
ances necessitate longer columns. Tall slender columns may be braced about both
axes to obtain an efficient design.
    Undoubtedly, heavy masonry walls afford substantial lateral support to steel
columns embedded wholly or partly in the wall. The general practice, however, is
to disregard this assistance.
    An important factor in determining column bracing is the allowable stress or
load for the column section (Art. 7.19). Column formulas for obtaining this stress
are based on the ratio of two variables, effective length Kl and the physical property
called radius of gyration r.
   The question of when to brace (to reduce the unsupported length and thus slen-
derness ratio) is largely a matter of economics and architectural arrangements; thus
no general answer can be given.


7.12.2   Beam Bracing

Economy in size of member dictates whether laterally unsupported beams should
have additional lateral support between end supports. Lateral support at intermediate
points should be considered whenever the allowable stress obtained from the re-
duction formulas for large l / rt falls below some margin, say 25%, of the stress
allowed for the fully braced condition. There are cases, however, where stresses as
low as 4.0 ksi have been justified, because intermediate lateral support was im-
practical.
    The question often arises: When is a steel beam laterally supported? There is
no fixed rule in specifications (nor any intended in this discussion) because the
7.38                                SECTION SEVEN


answer requires application of sound judgment based on experiences. Tests and
studies that have been made indicate that it takes rather small forces to balance the
lateral thrusts of initial buckling.
    Figure 7.21 illustrates some of the common situations encountered in present-
day practice. In general, positive lateral support is provided by:

   (a) and (b) All types of cast-in-place concrete slabs (questionable for vibrating
   loads and loads hung on bottom flange).
   (c) Metal and steel plate decks, with welded connections.
   (d ) Wood decks nailed securely to nailers bolted to the beam.
   (e) and (ƒ) Beam flange tied or braced to strut system, either as shown in (e)
   or by means of cantilever tees, as shown in (ƒ); however, struts should be ade-
   quate to resist rotation.
   (g) Purlins used as struts, with tees acting as cantilevers (common in rigid
   frames and arches). If plate stiffness are used, purlins should be connected to
   them with high-strength bolts to ensure rigidity.




FIGURE 7.21 Methods of providing lateral support for beams.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                             7.39


   (h) Open-web joists tack-welded (or the equivalent) to the beams, but the joists
   themselves must be braced together (bridging), and the flooring so engaged with
   the flanges that the joists, in turn, are adequately supported laterally.
   (i) Purlins connected close to the compression flange.
   (k) Tees (part of cast-in-place gypsum construction) welded to the beams.

Doubtful lateral support is provided by:

   ( j ) Purlins seated on beam webs, where the seats are distant from the critical
   flange
   (l ) Precast slabs not adequately fastened to the compression flange.

                                                  The reduction formulas for large l / r,
                                              given in Fig. 7–31 do not apply to steel
                                              beams fully encased in concrete, even
                                              though no other lateral support is pro-
                                              vided.
                                                  Introducing a secondary member to
                                              cut down the unsupported length does
                                              not necessarily result in adequate lateral
                                              support. The resistive capacity of the
                                              member and its supports must be traced
                                              through the system to ascertain effect-
                                              iveness. For example the system in Fig.
                                              7.22a may be free to deflect laterally as
                                              shown. This can be prevented by a rigid
                                              floor system that acts as a diaphragm, or
                                              in the absence of a floor, it may be nec-
                                              essary to X-brace the system as shown
FIGURE 7.22 Lateral bracing systems; (a)      in Fig. 7.22b.
without and (b) with X bracing.



FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMS

7.13    FLOOR-FRAMING
        DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

Selection of a suitable and economical floor system for a steel-frame building in-
volves many considerations: load-carrying capacity, durability, fire resistance, dead
weight, overall depth, facility for installing power, light, and telephones, facility for
installing aid conditioning, sound transmission, appearance, maintenance, and con-
struction time.
    Building codes specify minimum design live loads for floor and roof systems.
In the absence of a code regulation, one may use ‘‘Minimum Design Loads in
Buildings and Other Structures,’’ ASCE 7-93, American Society of Civil Engineers.
See also Art. 5.1.2. Floors should be designed to support the actual loading or these
minimum loads, whichever is larger. Most floors can be designed to carry any given
load. However, in some instances, a building code may place a maximum load limit
on particular floor systems without regard to calculated capacity.
7.40                              SECTION SEVEN


   Resistance to lateral forces should not be disregarded, especially in areas of
seismic disturbances or for perimeter windbents. In designs for such conditions,
floors may be employed as horizontal diaphragms to distribute lateral forces to
walls or vertical framing; those elements then transmit the lateral forces to the
foundations. When using lightweight floor systems, special reinforcement in the
floor slab may be necessary at those points where the floor diaphragm transfers the
horizontal forces to the frame elements.
   Durability becomes a major consideration when a floor is subject to loads other
than static or moderately kinetic types of forces. For example, a light joist system
may be just the floor for an apartment or an office building but may be questionable
for a manufacturing establishment where a floor must resist heavy impact and severe
vibrations. Shallow floor systems deflect more than deep floors; the system selected
should not permit excessive or objectionable deflections.
   Fire resistance and fire rating are very important factors, because building codes
in the interest of public safety, specify the degree of resistance that must be pro-
vided. Many floor systems are rated by the codes or by fire underwriters for pur-
poses of satisfying code requirements or basing insurance rates.
   The dead weight of the floor system, including the framing, is an important
factor affecting economy of construction. For one thing, substantial saving in the
weight and cost of a steel frame may result with lightweight floor systems. In
addition, low dead weight may also reduce foundation costs.
   Joist systems, either steel or concrete, require no immediate support, since they
are obtainable in lengths to meet normal bay dimensions in tier building construc-
tion. On the other hand, concrete arch and cellular-steel floors are usually designed
with one or two intermediate beams within the panel. The elimination of secondary
beams does not necessarily mean overall economy just because the structural-steel
contract is less. These beams are simple to fabricate and erect and allow much
duplication. An analysis of contract price shows that the cost per ton of secondary
beams will average 20% under the cost per ton for the whole steel structure; or
viewed another way, the omission of secondary beams increases the price per ton
on the balance of the steelwork by 31⁄2% on the average. This fact should be taken
into account when making a cost analysis of several systems.
   Sometimes, the depth of a floor system is important. For example, the height of
a building may be limited for a particular type of fire-resistant construction or by
zoning laws. The thickness of the floor system may well be the determining factor
limiting the number of stories that can be built. Also, the economy of a deep floor
is partly offset by the increase in height of walls, columns, pipes, etc.
   Another important consideration, particularly for office buildings and similar-
type occupancies, is the need for furnishing an economical and flexible electrical
wiring system. With the accent on movable partitions and ever-changing office
arrangements, the readiness and ease with which telephones, desk lights, computers,
and other electric-powered business machines can be relocated are of major im-
portance. Therefore, the floor system that by its makeup provides large void spaces
or cells for concealing wiring possesses a distinct advantage over competitive types
of solid construction. Likewise, accommodation of recessed lighting in ceilings may
disclose an advantage for one system over another. Furthermore, for economical air
conditioning and ventilation, location of ducts and method of support warrant study
of several floor systems.
   Sound transmission and acoustical treatments are other factors that need to be
evaluated. A wealth of data are available in reports of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. In general, floor systems of sandwich type with air
spaces between layers afford better resistance to sound transmission than solid sys-
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.41


tems, which do not interrupt sound waves. Although the ideal soundproof floor is
impractical, because of cost, several reasonably satisfactory systems are available.
Much depends on type of occupancy, floor coverings, and ceiling finish—acoustical
plaster or tile.
    Appearance and maintenance also should be weighed by the designer and the
owner. A smooth, neat ceiling is usually a prerequisite for residential occupancy;
a less expensive finish may be deemed satisfactory for an institutional building.
    Speed of construction is essential. Contractors prefer systems that enable the
follow-up trades to work immediately behind the erector and with unimpeded ef-
ficiency.
    In general, either rolled beams or open-web joists are used to support the floor
elements. The most common types of flooring are (a) concrete fill on metal deck,
(b) pre-cast concrete plank, and (c) cast-in-place concrete floors with integral joist.
Metal decks may be cellular or plain and are usually stud-welded to the supporting
elements to provide composite action. Cast-in-place concrete floors, or concrete-
pan floors, are becoming less common than in the past. In addition to the systems
described, there are several adaptations of these as well as other proprietary systems.


7.13.1   Steel Joist Floors

The lightest floor system in common use is the open-web steel joist construction
shown in Fig. 7.23. It is popular for all types of light occupancies, principally
because of initial low cost.
   Many types of open-web joists are available. Some employ bars in their makeup,
while others are entirely of rolled shapes; they all conform to standards and good-
practice specifications promulgated by the Steel Joist Institute and the American
Institute of Steel Construction (see Table 7.1). All joists conform to the standard
loading tables and carry the same size designation so that designers need only
indicate on project drawings the standard marking without reference to manufac-
turer, just as for a steel beam or column section.
   Satisfactory joists construction is assured by adhering to SJI and AISC recom-
mendations. Joists generally are spaced 2 ft c to c. They should be adequately
braced (with bridging) during construction to prevent rotation or buckling, and to
avoid ‘‘springy’’ floors, they should be carefully selected to provide sufficient depth.
   This system has many advantages: Falsework is eliminated. Joists are easily
handled, erected, and connected to supporting beams—usually by tack welding.




FIGURE 7.23 Open-web steel joist construction.
7.42                                SECTION SEVEN


Temporary coverage and working platforms are quickly placed. The open space
between joists, and through the webs, may be utilized for ducts, cables, light fix-
tures, and piping. A thin floor slab may be cast on steel lath, corrugated-steel sheets,
or wire-reinforced paper lath laid on top of the joists. A plaster ceiling may be
suspended or attached directly to the bottom flange of the joists.
   Lightweight beams, or so-called ‘‘junior’’ beams, are also used in the same
manner as open-web joists, and with the same advantages and economy, except
that the solid webs do not allow as much freedom in installation of utilities. Beams
may be spaced according to their safe load capacity; 3- and 4-ft spacings are com-
mon. As a type, therefore, the lightweight-steel-beam floor is intermediate between
concrete arches and open-web joists.


7.13.2   Cellular-Steel Floors

Cold-formed steel decking is frequently used in office buildings. One type is illus-
trated in Fig. 7.24. Other manufacturers make similar cellular metal decks, the
primary difference being in the shape of the cells. Often, decking with half cells is
used. These are open ended on the bottom, but flat sheets close those cells that
incorporate services. Sometimes, cells are enlarged laterally to transmit air for air
conditioning.
    Two outstanding advantages of cellular floors are rapidity of erection and ease
with which present and future connections can be made to telephone, computer,
light, and power wiring, each cell serving as a conduit. Each deck unit becomes a
working platform immediately on erection, thus enabling the several finishing trades
to follow right behind the steel erector.
    Although the cost of the steel deck system may be larger than that of other floor
systems, the cost differential can be narrowed to competitive position when equal
consideration for electrical facility is imposed on the other systems; e.g., the ad-
dition of 4 in of concrete fill to cover embedded electrical conduit on top of a
concrete flat-slab floor.
    In earlier floors of this type, the steel decking was assumed to be structurally
independent. In that case, the concrete fill served only to provide fire resistance
and a level floor. Most modern deckings, however, are bonded or locked to the
concrete, so that the two materials act as a unit in composite construction. Usually,
only top-quality stone concrete (ASTM C33 aggregates) is used, although light-
weight concrete made with ASTM C330 aggregates is an acceptable alternative.




         FIGURE 7.24 Cellular-steel floor construction.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.43


    Usage of cellular deck in composite construction is facilitated by economical
attachment of shear connectors to both the decking and underlying beams. For
example, when welded studs are used, a welding gun automatically fastens the studs
through two layers of hot-dipped galvanized decking to the unpainted top flanges
of the steel beams. This construction is similar to composite concrete-steel beams
(Art. 7.13.3)
    The total floor weight of cellular steel construction is low, comparable to open-
web steel joists. Weight savings of about 50% are obtained in comparison with all-
concrete floors; 30% savings in overall weight of the building. However, a big cost
saving in a high-labor-rate area results from elimination of costly formwork needed
for concrete slabs, since the steel decking serves as the form.
    Fire resistance for any required rating is contributed by the fill on top of the
cells and by the ceiling below (Fig. 7.24). Generally, removable panels for which
no fire rating is claimed are preferred for suspended ceilings. In this case, fireproof-
ing materials are applied directly to the underside of the metal deck and all exposed
surfaces of steel floor beams, a technique often called spray-on fireproofing.


7.13.3   Composite Concrete-Steel Beams

In composite construction, the structural concrete slab is made to assist the steel
beams in supporting loads. Hence, the concrete must be bonded to the steel to
ensure shear transfer. When the steel beams are completely encased in the concrete,
the natural bond is considered capable of resisting horizontal shear. But that bond
generally is disregarded when only the top flange is in contact with the concrete.
Consequently, shear connectors are used to resist the horizontal shear. Commonly
used connectors are welded studs, hooked or headed, and short lengths of channels.
   Usually, composite construction is most efficient for heavy loading, long spans,
large beam spacing, and restricted depths. Because the concrete serves much like
a cover plate, lighter steel beams may be used for given loads, and deflections are
smaller than for noncomposite construction.


7.13.4    Concrete-Pan Floors
                                             Concrete floors cast on removable metal
                                             forms or pans, which form the joists, are
                                             frequently used with steel girders. Since
                                             the joists span the distance between col-
                                             umns, intermediate steel beams are not
                                             needed (Fig. 7.25). This floor generally
                                             weighs less than the arch system (rein-
                                             forced concrete slabs on widely spaced
                                             beams), but still considerably more than
                                             the lightest types.
                                                 There are a number of variations of
                                             the concrete-joist system, such as the
                                             ‘‘gird’’ or ‘‘waffle’’ system, where the
                                             floor is cast on small, square, removable
                                             pans, or domes, so that the finished
FIGURE 7.25 Concrete joist floor.            product becomes a two-way joist sys-
                                             tem. Other systems employ permanent
7.44                               SECTION SEVEN


filler blocks—usually a lightweight tile. Some of these variations fall in the heaviest
floor classification; also the majority require substantial forms and shoring.



7.14   ROOF FRAMING SYSTEMS

These are similar in many respects to the floor types, discussed in Arts. 7.13 and
7.13.1. In fact, for flat-top tier buildings, the roof may be just another floor. How-
ever, when roof loads are smaller than floor loads, as is usually the case, it may be
economical to lighten the roof construction. For example, steel joists may be spaced
farther apart. Where roof decking is used, the spacing of the joists is determined
by the load-carrying ability of the applied decking and of the joists.
    Most of the considerations discussed for floors in Art. 7.13 also are applicable
to roof systems. In addition, however, due thought should be given to weather
resistance, heat conductance and insulation, moisture absorption and vapor barriers,
and especially to maintenance.
    Many roof systems are distinctive as compared with the floor types; for example,
the corrugated sheet-metal roofing commonly employed on many types of industrial
or mill buildings. The sheets rest on small beams, channels, or joists, called purlins,
which in turn are supported by trusses. Similar members on the sidewalls are called
girts.



DESIGN OF MEMBERS

In proportioning of members, designers should investigate one or more or a com-
bination of five basic stress or strength conditions: axial tension, axial compression,
bending, shearing, and member element crippling. Other conditions that should be
investigated under special conditions are local buckling, excessive deflection, tor-
sion and fatigue. Until the early 1990s, such analyses were based on allowable
stress design (ASD). More recently, a method known as load and resistance factor
design (LRFD) has come into use because it permits a more rational design. It takes
into account the probability of loading conditions and statistical variations in the
strength, or resistance capability, of members and connection materials.
    The use of LRFD design procedures will result in a savings of material, generally
in the range of 15 to 20%, and on major structures, some elements may show a
savings of up to 25%. Such weight savings generally means a lesser cost for the
structural steel. However, except for major structures, when serviceability factors
such as deflection and vibration are considered in the proportioning of the individual
members, the nominal savings of LRFD procedures versus ASD procedures is more
likely to be approximately 5%.



7.15   BASES FOR ASD AND LRFD

ASD is based on elastic theory. Design limits the maximum unit stress a member
is permitted to bear under service loads to a level determined by a judgmental, but
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                           7.45


experience-based, safety factor. Building codes establish allowable unit stresses,
which are normally related to the minimum yield stress for each grade of steel.
    Plastic design is based on the ultimate strength of members. A safety factor,
comparable to that established for elastic design, is applied to the design load to
determine the ultimate-load capacity required of a member.
    LRFD is based on the concept that no applicable limit state should be exceeded
when the structure, or any member or element, is subject to appropriate combina-
tions of factored loads.
    A limit state is defined as a condition in which a structure or structural com-
ponent becomes unfit for further structural service. A structural member can have
several limit states.
    Strength limit states relate to maximum load-carrying capacity.
    Serviceability limit states relate to performance under normal service conditions
with respect to such factors as deflection and vibration.
    Design specifications establish load factors to be applied to each type of service
load, such as dead, live, and wind loads, the values of the factors depending on the
specific combination of loads to be imposed on a structure (Art. 5.1.3).
    The AISC ‘‘Load and Resistance Factor Design Specification for Structural Steel
Buildings’’ requires that structures be designed so that, under the most critical
combination of factored loads, the design strength of the structures or their indi-
vidual elements is not exceeded. For each strength limit state, the design strength
is the product of the nominal strength and a resistance factor ␾, given in the spec-
ification. Derived with the use of probability theory, ␾ provides an extra margin of
safety for the limit state being investigated. Nominal strength of a member depends
on its geometric properties, yield or ultimate strength, and type of loading to be
resisted, such as tension, compression, or flexure.
    The AISC LRFD specification permits structural analysis based on either elastic
or plastic behavior. Elastic theory is most commonly used. Where plastic theory is
used for complex structures, all possible mechanisms that may form in the structure
should be investigated. The collapse mechanism is the one that requires the lightest
load for collapse to occur.
    Numerous computer programs for analysis and design of members or structures
are available. If data input describing the structure and loading are accurate, most
of these programs yield a quick and accurate design. For complex structures, care
should be taken in use of computer programs to check the results to ensure that
they are logical, since a critical input error may not be easily found. If a program
can produce a plot of the configuration of the loaded structure based on the data
input, the plot should be used as a check, inasmuch as omission of a member or
other errors in connectivity data can be readily discerned from the plot.
    (‘‘Plastic Design in Steel—A Guide and Commentary,’’ M & R No. 41, Amer-
ican Society of Civil Engineers.)



7.16   DESIGN AIDS AND REFERENCES

Design procedures using either the ASD or the LRFD specifications require the use
of many numerical values which represent the section properties of the individual
shapes or plates under consideration. Several publications in the form of handbooks
have been developed by the industry to provide the designer with this and other
useful information. In addition, many steel producers publish handbooks which
7.46                                  SECTION SEVEN


TABLE 7.9 Handbooks and Design Guides

         Publisher                         Title                         Content
American Institute of Steel   ASD Manual of Steel             Design specification
  Construction (AISC)           Construction                  Section properties
One East Wacker Drive                                         Dimensional data
Chicago, IL 60601-2001                                        Design aids
                              LRFD Manual of Steel            Design specification
                                Construction—Vol. I           Section properties
                                                              Dimensional data
                                                              Design aids
                              LRFD Manual of Steel            Design aids
                                Construction—Vol. I           Suggested design details
                                                              Dimensional data
                              Design Guide No. 1              Theory and examples of base
                                Column Base Plates              plate and anchor bolt
                                                                design
                              Design Guide No. 2              Theory and examples of web
                                Steel and Composite Beams       penetration design
                                with Web Openings
                              Design Guide No. 3              Design criteria
                                Serviceability Design
                                Considerations for Low-Rise
                                Buildings
                              Design Guide No. 5              Synopsis of design criteria
                                Design of Low- and              and design details
                                Medium-Rise Steel
                                Buildings
                              Design Guide No. 7              Industrial building design
                                Industrial Buildings: Roof
                                to Column Anchorage
                              Seismic Provisions for          Design criteria
                                Structural Steel Buildings    Design details
American Institute of Steel   Hollow Structural Sections      Section properties
  Construction (address         Connections Manual            Dimensional data
  above) or                                                   Fabrication
Steel Tube Institute of                                       Detail design criteria
  North America
8500 Station Street
Suite 270
Mentor, OH 44060
Steel Joist Institute (SJI)   Standard Specifications and     Dimensional data
3127 10th Ave.                  Load Tables, Open-Web         Load capacity
No. Ext.                        Steel Joist
No. Myrtle Beach, SC
  29577-6760
                                STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                  7.47


provide section property values for the products they market. Table 7.9 lists several
handbooks widely used by design professionals, as well as other design guides
which address specific design features.



7.17     SERVICEABILITY CRITERIA

Experienced designers are aware of certain practical limitations on the size of in-
dividual members. Flexural members which have marginal or too shallow a depth
can cause deflections that can damage other building elements, as well as cause
vibrations under moving loads that disturb a building’s occupants. Almost all build-
ing code leave stiffness design criteria to the designer. Experienced designers have
found that to specify limits for all possible variations loads, occupancies, and types
of construction is impracticable.
   This section outlines various criteria, originally based on experience but up-dated
on the basis of testing, which the designer can incorporate to develop a serviceable
design. The ASD specification (Table 7.1) restricts the maximum live-load deflec-
tion of beams and girders supporting plaster ceilings to 1⁄360 of the span. This
requirement is not applicable to less rigid construction details. The AISC LRFD
specification contains no numerical limits for serviceability criteria. Table 7.10 may
be used to set limits on deflections of flexural members frequently encountered in
building design.

Minimum Depth-Span Ratios. Also, as a guide, Table 7.10 lists suggested min-
imum depth-span ratios for various loading conditions and yield strengths of steel
up to Fy ⫽ 50.0 ksi. These may be useful for estimating or making an initial design
selection. Since maximum deflection is a straight-line function of maximum bend-


TABLE 7.10 Guide to Selection of Beam Depths and Deflection Limits

                                                  Yield stress Fy, ksi          Maximum stress, ksi
                                       36.0         42.0      45.0       50.0   0.60Fy       0.66Fy
                                                                                 Maximum ratio of
  Specific beam condition                    Minimum depth-span ratio            deflection to span
Heavy shock or vibration                1            1         1         1        1            1
                                        18          15.5      14.5       13      357          324
Heavy pedestrian traffic                1            1         1          1       1            1
                                        20           17        16        14.5    320          291
Normal loading                          1            1         1         1        1            1
                                        22           19        18        16      290          264
Beams for flat roofs*                   1            1         1         1        1            1
                                        25          21.5       20        18      258          232
Roof purlins, except for flat           1            1         1         1        1            1
  roofs*                                28           24        22        20      232          210
   * Investigate for stability against ponding.
7.48                                 SECTION SEVEN


ing stress ƒb and therefore is nearly proportional to Fy, a beam of steel with Fy ⫽
100.0 ksi would have to be twice the depth of a beam of steel with Fy ⫽ 50.0 ksi
when each is stressed to allowable values and has the same maximum deflection.
   Vibration of large floor areas that are usually free of physical dampeners, such
as partitions, may occur in buildings such as shopping centers and department
stores, where pedestrian traffic is heavy. The minimum depth-span ratios in Table
7.10 suggested for ‘‘heavy pedestrian traffic’’ are intended to provide an acceptable
solution.
   One rule of thumb that may be used to determine beam depth quickly is to
choose a depth, in, not less than 1.5% of Fy times the span, ft. Thus, for A36 steel
depth, in, should be at least half the span, ft.

Ponding. Beams for flat roofs may require a special investigation to assure sta-
bility against water accumulation, commonly called ponding, unless there is ade-
quate provision for drainage during heavy rainfall. The AISC specification gives
these criteria for stable roofs:
                                   Cp ⫹ 0.9Cs ⱕ 0.25                              (7.1)

                                                    25S4
                                             Id ⱖ                                 (7.2)
                                                     106
where Cp    ⫽   32LsLp4 / 107 Ip
      Cs    ⫽   32SL4s / 107 Is
      Lp    ⫽   column spacing in direction of girder, ft (length of primary members)
      Ls    ⫽   column spacing perpendicular to direction of girder, ft (length of sec-
                ondary member)
       S⫽       spacing of secondary members, ft
       Ip ⫽     moment of inertia for primary members, in4
       Is ⫽     moment of inertia for secondary members, in4. Where a steel deck is
                supported on primary members, it is considered the secondary member.
                Use 0.85Is for joists and trusses
       Id ⫽     moment of inertia of a steel deck supported on secondary members,
                in4 / ft

Uniform-Load Deflections. For the common case of a uniformly loaded simple
beam loaded to the maximum allowable bending stress, the deflection in inches
may be computed from
                                            5 Fbl
                                      ␦⫽                                          (7.3)
                                           24 Ed / l
where Fb    ⫽   the allowable bending stress, ksi
        l   ⫽   the span, in
       E    ⫽   29,000 ksi
     d/l    ⫽   the depth-span ratio

Drift. AISC Design Guide No. 3 (Table 7.9) suggests that the lateral deflection
of a building frame (drift) be limited to a value which does not damage other
structural or architectural components when subject to a 10-year recurrence interval
wind pressure. The 10-year wind pressure can be reasonably estimated at 75% of
the 50-year wind pressure.
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                          7.49


Camber. Trusses of 80-ft or greater span should be cambered to offset dead-load
deflections. Crane girders 75 ft or more in span should be cambered for deflection
under dead load plus one-half live load.



7.18     TENSION MEMBERS

These are proportioned so that their gross and net areas are large enough to resist
imposed loads. The criteria for determining the net area of a tension member with
bolt holes is the same for allowable stress design and load-and-resistance-factor
design. In determination of net area, the width of a bolt hole should be taken 1⁄16
in larger than the nominal dimension of the hole normal to the direction of applied
stress. Although the gross section for a tension member without holes should be
taken normal to the direction of applied stress, the net section for a tension member
with holes should be chosen as the one with the smallest area that passes through
any chain of holes across the width of the member. Thus, the net section may pass
through a chain of holes lying in a plane normal to the direction of applied stress
or through holes along a diagonal of zigzag line.
    Net section for a member with a chain of holes extending along a diagonal or
zigzag line is the product of the net width and thickness. To determine net width,
deduct from the gross width the sum of the diameters of all the holes in the chain,
then add, for each gage space in the chain, the quantity
                                         s2
                                         4g
where s ⫽ longitudinal spacing (pitch, in) of any two consecutive holes and g ⫽
          transverse spacing (gage, in) of the same two holes.
The critical net section of the member is obtained from that chain with the least
net width.
    When a member axially stressed in tension is subjected to nonuniform transfer
of load because of connections through bolts to only some of the elements of the
cross section, as in the case of a W, M, or S shape connected solely by bolts through
the flanges, the net area should be reduced as follows: 10% if the flange width is
at least two-thirds the beam depth and at least three fasteners lie along the line of
stress; 10% also for structural tees cut from such shapes; 15% for any of the pre-
ceding shapes that do not meet those criteria and for other shapes that have at least
three fasteners in line of stress; and 25% for all members with only two fasteners
in the line of stress.


7.18.1   ASD of Tension Members

Unit tensile stress Ft on the gross area should not exceed 0.60Fy, where Fy is the
minimum yield stress of the steel member (see Table 7.11). Nor should Ft exceed
0.50Fu, where Fu is the minimum tensile strength of the steel member, when the
allowable stress is applied to the net area of a member connected with fasteners
requiring holes. However, if the fastener is a large pin, as used to connect eyebars,
pin plates, etc., Ft is limited to 0.45Fy on the net area. Therefore, for the popular
7.50                                SECTION SEVEN


                 TABLE 7.11 Tension on Gross Area

                     Allowable tensile          Unit design tensile
                       stress (ASD)              strength (LRFD)
                     Fy, ksi       Ft, ksi   Fy, ksi       ␾Pn / Ag
                       36           21.6       36            32.4
                       42           25.2       42            37.8
                       45           27.0       45            30.5
                       50           30.0       50            45.0
                       55           33.0       55            49.5
                       60           36.0       60            54.0



A36 steel, the allowable tension stresses for gross and net areas are 22.0 and 29.0
ksi, respectively, and in the case of pin plates, 16.2 ksi.


7.18.2   LRFD of Tension Members

Design tensile strength ␾Pn, kips, of the gross area Ag, in2, should not exceed
0.90Fy, where Fy is the minimum yield stress of the steel (Table 7.9) and Pn ⫽
AgFy. Nor should the design tensile strength ␾Pn, kips, exceed 0.75Fu on the net
area Ae, in2, of the member. Other criteria control the design tensile strength of pin-
connected members. (Refer to the AISC specification for LRFD.)


7.19     COLUMNS AND OTHER
         COMPRESSION MEMBERS

The principal factors governing the proportioning of members carrying compressive
forces are overall column buckling, local buckling, and gross section area. The
effect of overall column buckling depends on the slenderness ratio Kl / r, where Kl
is the effective length, in, of the column, l is the unbraced length, and r is the least
radius of gyration, in, of the cross section. The effect of local buckling depends on
the width-thickness ratios of the individual elements of the member cross section.
    W shapes with depths of 8, 10, 12, and 14 in are most commonly used for
building columns and other compression members. For unbraced compression
members, the most efficient shape is one where the value of ry with respect to the
minor axis approaches the value of rx with respect to the major axis.
    When built-up sections are used as compression members, the element joining
the principal load-carrying elements, such as lacing bars, should have a shear ca-
pacity of at least 2% of the axial load.


7.19.1   Effective Column Length

Proper application of the column capacity formulas for ASD or LRFD depends on
judicious selection of K. This term is defined as the ratio of effective column length
to actual unbraced length.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                           7.51

                                                  For a pin-ended column with trans-
                                              lation of the ends prevented, K ⫽ 1. But
                                              in general, K may be greater or less than
                                              unity. For example, consider the col-
                                              umns in the frame in Fig. 7.26. They are
                                              dependent entirely on their own stiffness
                                              for stability against sidesway. If enough
                                              axial load is applied to them, their ef-
                                              fective length will exceed their actual
                                              length. But if the frame were braced to
                                              prevent sidesway, the effective length
                                              would be less than the actual length be-
                                              cause of the resistance to end rotation
                                              provided by the girder.
                                                  Theoretical values of K for six ide-
FIGURE 7.26 Configurations of members of alized conditions in which joint rotation
a rigid frame caused by sidesway.             and translation are either fully realized
                                              or nonexistent are given in Fig. 7.27.
Also noted are values recommended by the Column Research Council for use in
design when these conditions are approximated. Since joint fixity is seldom fully
achieved, slightly higher design values than theoretical are given for fixed-end col-
umns.
    Specifications do not provide criteria for sidesway resistance under vertical load-
ing, because it is impossible to evaluate accurately the contribution to stiffness of
the various components of a building. Instead, specifications cite the general con-
ditions that have proven to be adequate.




    FIGURE 7.27 Values of effective column length K for idealized conditions.
7.52                                  SECTION SEVEN


   Constructions that inhibit sidesway in building frames include substantial ma-
sonry walls, interior shear walls; braced towers and shafts; floors and roofs provid-
ing diaphragm action—that is, stiff enough to brace the columns to shear walls or
bracing systems; frames designed primarily to resist large side loadings or to limit
horizontal deflection; and diagonal X bracing in the planes of the frames. Com-
pression members in trusses are considered to be restrained against translation at
connections. Generally, for all these constructions, K may be taken as unity, but a
value less than one is permitted if proven by analysis.
   When resistance to sidesway depends solely on the stiffness of the frames; for
example, in tier buildings with light curtain walls or with wide column spacing,
and with no diagonal bracing systems or shear walls, the designer may use any of
several proposed rational methods for determining K. A quick estimate, however,
can be made by using the alignment chart in an AISC ‘‘Manual of Steel Construc-
tion.’’ The effective length Kl of compression members, in such cases, should not
be less than the actual unbraced length.


7.19.2   ASD of Compression Members

The allowable compressive stress on the gross section of axially loaded members
is given by formulas determined by the effective slenderness ratios Kl / r of the
members. A critical value, designated Cc, occurs at the slenderness ratio corre-
sponding to the maximum stress for elastic buckling failure (Table 7.12). This is
illustrated in Fig. 7.28. An important fact to note: when Kl / r exceeds Cc ⫽ 126.1,
the allowable compressive stress is the same for A36 and all higher-strength steels.
                                 Cc ⫽ 兹2␲; s2E / Fy                             (7.4)
where E ⫽ modulus of elasticity of the steel ⫽ 29,000 ksi and Fy ⫽ specified
minimum yield stress, ksi.
    When Kl / r for any unbraced segments is less than Cc, the allowable compressive
stress, ksi is
                                      [1 ⫺ (Kl / r)2 / 2C 2c ]Fy
                               Fa ⫽                                             (7.5)
                                               FS
where FS is the safety factor, which varies from 1.67 when Kl / r ⫽ 0 to 1.92 when
Kl / r ⫽ Cc.


                     TABLE 7.12 Slenderness Ratio at
                     Maximum Stress for Elastic Buckling
                     Failure

                     Fy, ksi           Cc           Fy, ksi        Cc
                      36.0            126.1           60.0         97.7

                      42.0            166.7          65.0          93.8
                      45.0            112.8          90.0          79.8
                      50.0            107.0         100.0          75.7
                      55.0            102.0
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.53




               FIGURE 7.28 Allowable stresses for axial compression.



                                     5 3Kl / r (Kl / r)3
                             FS ⫽      ⫹      ⫺                                   (7.6)
                                     3   8Cc    8C 3c
   When Kl / r is greater than Cc:
                                      12␲ 2E       149,000
                             Fa ⫽                ⫽                                (7.7)
                                     23(Kl / r)2   (Kl / r)2
This is the Euler column formula for elastic buckling with a constant safety factor
of 1.92 applied.
   Increased stresses are permitted for bracing and secondary members with l / r
greater than 120. (K is taken as unity.) For such members, the allowable compres-
sive stress is
                                              Fa
                                 Fas ⫽                                            (7.8)
                                         1.6 ⫺ l / 200r
where Fa is given by Eq. (7.5) or (7.6). The higher stress is justified by the relative
       FIGURE 7.29 Maximum width-thickness ratios for allowable stress design of compression members.
7.54
FIGURE 7.29 Maximum width-thickness ratios for allowable stress design of compression members.
(Continued )
7.55
7.56                               SECTION SEVEN


unimportance of these members and the greater restraint likely at their end con-
nections. The full unbraced length should always be used for l.
   Tables giving allowable stresses for the entire range of Kl / r appear in the AISC
ASD ‘‘Manual of Steel Construction.’’ Approximate values may be obtained from
Fig. 7.28. Allowable stresses are based on certain minimum sizes of structural
members and their elements that make possible full development of strength before
premature buckling occurs. The higher the allowable stresses the more stringent
must be the dimensional restrictions to preclude buckling or excessive deflections.
   The AISC ASD specification for structural steel buildings limits the effective
slenderness ratio Kl / r to 200 for columns, struts, and truss members, where K is
the ratio of effective length to actual unbraced length l, and r is the least radius of
gyration.
   A practical rule also establishes limiting slenderness ratios l / r for tension mem-
bers:
                   For main members                            240
                   For bracing and secondary members           300
But this does not apply to rods or other tension members that are drawn up tight
(prestressed) during erection. The purpose of the rule is to avoid objectionable
slapping or vibration in long, slender members.
    The AISC ASD specification also specifies several restricting ratios for com-
pression members. One set applies to projecting elements subjected to axial com-
pression or compression due to bending. Another set applies to compression ele-
ments supported along two edges.
    Figure 7.29 lists maximum width-thickness ratios, b / t, for commonly used el-
ements and grades of steel. Tests show that when b / t of elements normal to the
direction of compressive stress does not exceed these limits, the member may be
stressed close to the yield stress without failure by local buckling. Because the
allowable stress increases with Fy, the specified yield stress of the steel, width-
thickness ratios are less for higher-strength steels.
    These b / t ratios should not be confused with the width-thickness ratios described
in Art. 7.20. There, more restrictive conditions are set in defining compact sections
qualified for higher allowable stresses.


7.19.3   LRFD of Compression Members

When the elements of the cross section of a compression member have width-
thickness ratios that do not exceed the limits tabulated in Table 7.13, the design
compressive strength is ␾c Pn. The resistance factor ␾c should be taken as 0.85. The
nominal strength is given by Pn ⫽ AgFcr, where Ag is the cross-sectional area, in2,
and Fcr is the critical compressive stress, ksi. Formulas for Fct are based on a
parameter ␭c.


                                       冪 E ⫽ Klr 冪286,220
                                  Kl    Fy           Fy
                           ␭c ⫽                                                   (7.9)
                                  r␲
where E ⫽ modulus of elasticity, ksi ⫽ 29,000 ksi. For ␭c ⱕ 1.5,
                                                2
                                   Fcr ⫽ 0.658␭cFy                              (7.10)
For ␭c ⬎ 1.5,
                               STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                          7.57


TABLE 7.13 Limiting Width-Thickness Ratios for LRFD of Columns

                                             Width             Limiting width-thickness ratio ␭r
                                           thickness
       Compression elements                   ratio          General           A36 steel       A50 steel
Flanges of W and other I shapes                b/t      95 / 兹Fy             15.8             13.4
  and channels; outstanding legs of
  pairs of angles in continuous
  contact
Flanges of square and rectangular              b/t      238 / 兹Fy ⫺ F*
                                                                     r 47.7 (rolled) 37.6
  box sections; flange cover plates                                    53.9            (rolled)
  and diaphragm plates between                                           (welded) 41.1
  lines of fasteners or welds                                                          (welded)
Legs of single angle struts and                b/t      76 / 兹Fy       12.7          10.7
  double angle struts with
  separators; unstiffened elements
  (i.e., supported along one edge)
Stems of tees                                 d/t       127 / 兹Fy            21.2             18.0
All other stiffened elements                  b/t       253 / 兹Fy            42.2             35.8
  (elements supported along two              hc / t w
  edges)
   * Fy ⫽ compressive residual stress in flange: 10 ksi for rolled shapes, 16.5 ksi for welded sections.



                                         Fcr ⫽ (0.877 / ␭2c )Fy                                      (7.11)
Computations can be simplified by use of column load tables in the AISC LRFD
‘‘Steel Construction Manual.’’
   For design of columns with elements having width-thickness ratios exceeding
the limits in Table 7.13, refer to the AISC LRFD specification.
   (T. V. Galambos, ‘‘Guide to Design Criteria for Metal Compression Members,’’
4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.)



7.20     BEAMS AND OTHER FLEXURAL MEMBERS

The capacity of members subject to bending depends on the cross-section geometry,
AISC ASD and LRFD procedures incorporate the concept of compact and non-
compact sections.


7.20.1    ASD of Flexural Members

Beams classified as compact are allowed a bending stress, ksi, Fb ⫽ 0.66Fy for the
extreme surfaces in both tension and compression, where Fy, is the specified yield
stress, ksi. Such members have an axis of symmetry in the plane of loading, their
compression flange is adequately braced to prevent lateral displacement, and they
develop their full plastic moment (section modulus times yield stress) before buck-
ling.
7.58                               SECTION SEVEN




  FIGURE 7.30 Requirements for laterally supported compact beam sections in ASD.
                    STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                7.59




FIGURE 7.30 Requirements for laterally supported compact beam sections in ASD.
(Continued )
7.60                               SECTION SEVEN


Compactness Requirements. To qualify as compact, members must meet the fol-
lowing conditions:

   1. The flanges must be continuously connected to the web or webs.
   2. The width-thickness ratio of unstiffened projecting elements of the compres-
sion flange must not exceed 65.0 / 兹Fy. For computation of this ratio, with b equals
one-half the full flange width of I-shaped sections, or the distance from the free
edge to the first row of fasteners (or welds) for projecting plates, or the full width
of legs of angles, flanges of zees of channels, or tee stems.
   3. The web depth-thickness ratio d/tw must not exceed 640(1 ⫺ 3.74a /Fy)/ 兹F
when ƒa, the computed axial stress, is equal to or less than 0.16Fy, or 257 / 兹Fy
when ƒa ⬎ 0.16Fy.
   4. The width-thickness ratio of stiffened compression flange plates in box sec-
tions and that part of the cover plates for beams and built-up members that is
included between longitudinal lines of bolts or welds must not exceed 190 / 兹Fy.
   5. For the compression flange of members not box shaped to be considered
supported, unbraced length between lateral supports should not exceed
76.0bƒ / 兹Fy or 20,000 Aƒ / Fyd, where bƒ is the flange width, Aƒ the flange area, and
d the web depth.
   6. The unbraced length for rectangular box-shaped members with depth not
more than 6 times the width and with flange thickness not more than 2 times the
web thickness must not exceed (1950 ⫹ 1200 M1 / M2)b / Fy. The unbraced length
in such cases, however, need not be less than 1200b / Fy. M1 is the smaller and M2
the larger of bending moments at points of lateral support.
   7. The diameter-thickness ratio of hollow circular steel sections must not exceed
300 / Fy.

Allowable Bending Stresses for Compact Beams. Most sections used in building
framing, including practically all rolled W shapes of A36 steel and most of those
with Fy ⫽ 50 ksi, comply with the preceding requirements for compactness, as
illustrated in Fig. 7.30. Such sections, therefore, are designed with Fb ⫽ 0.66Fy.
Excluded from qualifying are hybrid girders, tapered girders, and sections made
from A514 steel.
    Braced sections that meet the requirements for compactness, and are continuous
over their supports or rigidly framed to columns, are also permitted a redistribution
of the design moments. Negative gravity-load moments at supports may be reduced
10%. But then, the maximum positive moment must be increased by 1% of the
average negative moments. This moment redistribution does not apply to canti-
levers, hybrid girders, or members of the A514 steel.

Allowable Bending Stresses for Noncompact Beams. Many other beam-type
members, including nearly compact sections that do not meet all seven require-
ments, are accorded allowable bending stresses, some higher and some considerably
lower than 0.66Fy, depending on such conditions as shape factor, direction of load-
ing, inherent resistance to torsion or buckling, and external lateral support. The
common conditions and applicable allowable bending stresses are summarized in
Fig. 7.31. In the formulas,
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                7.61




      FIGURE 7.31 Allowable bending stresses for sections not qualifying as compact.



  l ⫽ distance, in, between cross sections braced against twist or lateral displace-
      ment of the compression flange
 rt ⫽ radius of gyration, in, of a section comprising the compression flange plus
      one-third of the compression web area, taken about an axis in the plane of
      the web
Aƒ ⫽ area of the compression flange, in2

   The allowable bending stresses Fb, ksi, for values often used for various grades
of steel are listed in Table 7.14.
7.62                              SECTION SEVEN


                     TABLE 7.14 Allowable Bending Stresses,
                     ksi

                      Fy        0.60Fy       0.66Fy      0.75Fy
                     36.0        22.0         24.0        27.0
                     42.0        25.2         27.7        31.5
                     45.0        27.0         29.7        33.8
                     50.0        30.0         33.0        37.5
                     55.0        33.0         36.3        41.3
                     60.0        36.0         39.6        45.0
                     65.0        39.0         42.9        48.8



Lateral Support of Beams. In computation of allowable bending stresses in com-
pression for beams with distance between lateral supports exceeding requirements,
a range sometimes called laterally unsupported, the AISC ASD formulas contain a
moment factor Cb in recognition of the beneficial effect of internal moments, both
in magnitude and direction, at the points of support. For the purpose of this sum-
mary, however, the moment factor has been taken as unity and the formulas sim-
plified in Fig. 7.31. The formulas are exact for the case in which the bending
moment at any point within an unbraced length is larger than that at both ends of
this length. They are conservative for all other cases. Where more refined values
are desired, see Art. 7.20.2 or refer to the AISC ASD specification for structural
steel buildings.

Limits on Beam Width-Thickness Ratios. For flexural members in which the
width-thickness ratios of compression elements exceed the limits given in Fig. 7.31
and which are usually lightly stressed, appropriate allowable bending stresses are
suggested in ‘‘Slender Compression Elements,’’ Appendix C, AISC specification.
   For additional discussion of lateral support, see Art. 7.12.2. Also, addition in-
formation on width-thickness ratios of compression elements is given in Fig. 7.29.

ASD for Shear in Flexural Members. The shear strength of a flexural member
may be computed by dividing the total shear force at a section by the web area,
the product of the web thickness and overall member depth. Whereas flexural
strength normally controls selection of rolled shapes, shear strength can be critical
when the web has cutouts or holes that reduce the net web area of when a short-
span beam carries a large concentrated load. Also, in built-up members, such as
plate girders or rigid frame elements, shear often controls web thickness.
    The web depth-thickness ratio permitted without stiffeners, h / t ⱕ 380 / 兹Fy for
ASD and h / t ⱕ 418 / 兹Fy for LRFD, is satisfied by the W shapes of A36 steel.
Furthermore, only the lightest one or two W sections in each depth fail to satisfy
these criteria for 50-ksi material.
    For members with h / t ⱕ 380 / 兹Fy, the unit shear stress on the gross section
should not be greater than Fv ⫽ 0.40Fy, where Fy is the minimum yield point of
the web steel ksi (Table 7.15). Members with higher h / t ratios require stiffeners
(see Art. 7.21.1).
    Beams with web angle or shear-bar end connections and a coped top flange
should be checked for shear on the critical plane through the holes in the web. In
this case, the allowable unit shear stress is Fv ⫽ 0.30Fu, where Fu is the minimum
tensile strength of the steel, ksi.
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.63


            TABLE 7.15 Allowable Shear on Gross Area, ksi

                  For ASD                                For LRFD
             when h / t ⱕ 380 / 兹Fy                 when h / t ⱕ 418 / 兹Fy
             Fy                  Fu                 Fy                 ␾Vn
            36.0                14.5               36.0                19.4
            42.0                17.0               42.0                22.7
            45.0                18.0               45.0                24.3
            50.0                20.0               50.0                27.0
            55.0                22.0               55.0                29.7
            60.0                24.0               60.0                32.4



    A special case occurs when a web lies in a plane common to intersecting mem-
bers; for example, the knee of a rigid frame. Then, shear stresses generally are high.
Such webs, in elastic design, should be reinforced when the web thickness is less
than 32M / AbcFy, where M is the algebraic sum of clockwise and counterclockwise
moments (in ft-kips) applied on opposite sides of the connection boundary, and Abc
is the planar area of the connection web, in2 (approximately the product of the
depth of the member introducing the moment and the depth of the intersecting
member). In plastic design, this thickness is determined from 23Mp / AbcFy, where
Mp is the plastic moment, or M times a load factor of 1.70. In this case, the total
web shear produced by the factored loading should not exceed the web area (depth
times thickness) capacity in shear. Otherwise, the web must be reinforced with
diagonal stiffeners or a doubler plate.
    For deep girder webs, allowable shear is reduced. The reduction depends on the
ratio of clear web depth between flanges to web thickness and an aspect ratio of
stiffener spacing to web depth. In practice, this reduction does not apply when the
ratio of web depth to thickness is less than 380 / 兹Fy.


7.20.2   LRFD of Flexural Members

The AISC LRFD specification for structural steel buildings permits plastic analysis
for steels with yield stress not exceeding 65 ksi. Negative moments induced by
gravity loading may be reduced 10% for compact beams, if the positive moments
are increased by 10% of the average of the negative moments.
   Design strength in bending of flexural members is defined as ␾bMn, where the
resistance ␾b ⫽ 0.90 and Mn is the nominal flexural strength. Mn depends on several
factors, including the geometry of the section, the unbraced length of the compres-
sion flange, and properties of the steel. Beams may be compact, noncompact, or
slender-element sections. For compact beams, the AISC specification sets limits on
the width-thickness ratios of section elements to restrict local buckling. These limits
are listed in Table 7.16.
   For a compact section bent about the major axis, the unbraced length Lb of the
compression flange where plastic hinges may form at failure may not exceed Lpd
given by Eqs. (7.12) and (7.13). For beams bent about the minor axis and square
and circular beams, Lb is not restricted for plastic analysis.
   For I-shaped beams that are loaded in the plane of the web and are symmetric
about major and minor axes or symmetric about the minor axis but with the com-
pression flange larger than the tension flange, including hybrid girders,
7.64                                 SECTION SEVEN


TABLE 7.16 Limiting Width-Thickness Ratios for LRFD of Beams

                                                           Limiting width-thickness
                                                                   ratio, ␭p
                                    Width-thickness
         Beam element                    ratio        General     A36 steel    A50 steel
Flanges of W and other I shapes           b/t          65 / 兹Fy      10.8         9.2
  and channels
Flanges of square and rectangular         b/t         190 / 兹Fy      31.7        26.9
  box sections; flange cover
  plates and diaphragm plates
  between lines of fasteners or
  welds
Webs in flexural compression             hc / tw      640 / 兹Fy     106.7        90.5



                                    3600 ⫹ 2200(M1 / Mp)
                            Lpd ⫽                        ry                      (7.12)
                                            Fyc
where Fyc ⫽ minimum yield stress, ksi, of compression flange
      M1 ⫽ smaller of the moments, in-kips, at the end of the unbraced length of
            the beam.
      Mp ⫽ plastic moment, in-kips
       ry ⫽ radius of gyration, in, about minor axis
For homogeneous sections, Mp ⫽ Fy Z, where Z is the plastic section modulus, in3.
(For hybrid girders, Z may be computed from the fully plastic distribution.) M1 /
Mp is positive for beams with reverse curvature, negative for single curvature.
   For solid rectangular bars and symmetric box beams,
                                    5000 ⫹ 3000(M1 / Mp)
                            Lpd ⫽                        ry                      (7.13)
                                            Fy
   The flexural design strength 0.90Mn is determined by the limit state of lateral
torsional buckling and should be calculated for the region of the last hinge to form
and for regions not adjacent to a plastic hinge. For compact sections bent about the
major axis, Mn depends on the following unbraced lengths:
 Lb ⫽ distance, in, between points braced against lateral displacement of the com-
      pression flange or between points braced to prevent twist
 Lp ⫽ limiting laterally unbraced length, in, for full plastic bending capacity
    ⫽ 300ry / 兹Fyƒ for I shapes and channels
    ⫽ 3750(ry / Mp) / 兹JA for box beams and solid rectangular bars
Fyƒ ⫽ flange yield stress, ksi
  J ⫽ torsional constant, in4 (see AISC LRFD ‘‘Manual of Steel Construction’’)
 A ⫽ cross-sectional area, in2
 Lr ⫽ limiting laterally unbraced length, in, for inelastic lateral buckling
   For I-shaped beams symmetric about the major or minor axis or symmetric about
the minor axis with the compression flange larger than the tension flange, and
channels loaded in the plane of the web,
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                       7.65



                                       冪1 ⫹ 兹1 ⫹ X (F
                             ry X1
                   Lr ⫽                                        ⫺ Fr)2       (7.14)
                          (Fyw ⫺ Fr)                  2   yw


where Fyw ⫽ specified minimum yield stress of web, ksi
       Fr ⫽ compressive residual stress in flange ⫽ 10 ksi for rolled shapes, 16.5
             ksi for welded sections
       X1 ⫽ (␲ / Sx) 兹EGJA / 2
       X2 ⫽ (4Cw / Iy) (Sx / GJ)2
        E ⫽ elastic modulus of the steel ⫽ 29,000 ksi
       G ⫽ shear modulus of elasticity ⫽ 11,200 ksi
       Sx ⫽ section modulus about major axis, in3 (with respect to the compres-
             sion flange if that flange is larger than the tension flange)
      Cw ⫽ warping constant, in6 (see AISC Manual—LRFD)
        Iy ⫽ moment of inertia about minor axis, in4


7.20.3   Limit-State Moments

For the aforementioned shapes, the limiting buckling moment Mr, ksi, may be
computed from
                                 Mr ⫽ (Fyw ⫺ Fr)Sx                          (7.15)
For compact beams with Lb ⱕ Lr , bent about the major axis,

                             冋
                   Mn ⫽ Cb Mp ⫺ (Mp ⫺ Mr)
                                                    Lb ⫺ Lp
                                                    Lr ⫺ Lp册ⱕ Mp            (7.16)

where Cb ⫽ 1.75 ⫹ 1.05(M1 / M2) ⫹ 0.3(M1 / M2)2 ⱕ 2.3, where M1 is the smaller
           and M2 the larger end moment in the unbraced segment of the beam;
           M1 / M2 is positive for reverse curvature
         ⫽ 1.0 for unbraced cantilevers and beams with moment over much of
           the unbraced segment equal to or greater than the larger of the segment
           end moments (see T. V. Galambos ‘‘Guide to Stability Design Criteria
           for Metal Structures,’’ 4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
           for use of larger values of Cb)
   For solid rectangular bars bent about the major axis,
                             Lr ⫽ 57,000(ry / Mr) 兹JA                       (7.17)
and the limiting buckling moment is given by
                                       Mr ⫽ Fy Sx                           (7.18)
For symmetric box sections loaded in the plane of symmetry and bent about the
major axis, Mr should be determined from Eq. (7.15) and Lr from Eq. (7.17).
   For compact beams with Lb ⬎ Lr , bent about the major axis,
                                 Mn ⫽ Mcr ⱕ CbMr                            (7.19)
where Mcr ⫽ critical elastic moments, kip-in. For shapes to which Eq. (17.11)
applies,
7.66                                 SECTION SEVEN


                     Mcr ⫽ Cb (␲ / Lb) 兹EIyGJ ⫹ IyCw(␲E / Lb)2               (7.20)
For solid rectangular bars and symmetric box sections,
                              Mcr ⫽ 57,000Cb 兹JA / (Lb / ry)                 (7.21)

Noncompact Beams. The nominal flexural strength Mn for noncompact beams is
the least value determined from the limit states of
1. Lateral-torsional buckling (LTB)
2. Flange local buckling (FLB)
3. Web local buckling (WLB)
The AISC LRFD specification for structural steel buildings presents formulas for
determining limit-state moments. In most cases, LRFD computations for flexural
members can be simplified by use of tables in the AISC ‘‘Manual of Steel Con-
struction—LRFD.’’ See also Art. 7.21.

LRFD for Shear in Flexural Members. The design shear strength is ␾VVn, where
␾V ⫽ 0.90, and for rolled shapes and built-up members without stiffeners is gov-
erned by the web depth-thickness ratio. The design shear strength may be computed
from
                                                               h   418
␾Vn ⫽ 0.90 ⫻ 0.6Fy Aw ⫽ 0.54Fy Aw                                ⱕ           (7.22)
                                                               t   兹Fy

                    418 / 兹Fy                 418 / 兹Fy        418  h  523
␾Vn ⫽ 0.90 ⫻ 0.6                ⫽ 0.54Fy Aw                        ⬍ ⱕ       (7.23)
                        b/t                      h/t           兹Fy  t  兹Fy

                    132,000 119,000                            h   523
␾Vn ⫽ 0.90 ⫻ Aw               ⫽                                  ⬎           (7.24)
                     (h / t)2   (h / t)2                       t   兹Fy
where Vn   ⫽  nominal shear strength, kips
      Aw   ⫽  area of the web, in2 ⫽ dt
       d   ⫽  overall depth, in
       t   ⫽  thickness of web, in
       h   ⫽  the following web dimensions, in: clear distance between fillets for
              rolled shapes; clear distance between flanges for welded sections
         Fy ⫽ specified minimum yield stress, ksi, of web steel
See also Art. 7.21.2.


7.20.4    Beam Penetrations

Certain designs, especially buildings with minimal floor-to-floor heights, require
penetrations, or openings, in the webs of beams to permit the routing of ductwork
or piping. In general, such penetrations can safely be made at locations where the
beam shear loading is low if the penetration height is limited to half the beam
depth. The central span region of a beam carrying a uniform load is an example
of a typical situation. The penetration should be centered on the mutual axis of the
member and all re-entrant corners should have a generous radius.
                         STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                          7.67




                FIGURE 7.32 Typical beam penetrations.



   When penetrations are necessary at locations with higher shear loadings, it may
be necessary to reinforce the web with longitudinal stiffeners. Figure 7.32 shows
typical configurations with (a) being unreinforced and (b) reinforced. Design of
such reinforcement is done by considering a free-body of the section of the beam
containing the penetration. Further information on beam penetrations is available
in AISC Design Guide No. 2 (Table 7.9).


7.21   PLATE GIRDERS

Plate girders may have either a box or an I shape. Main components are plates or
plates and angles, arranged so that the cross section is either singly or doubly
symmetrical. Generally, the elements are connected by continuous fillet welds. In
existing construction, the connection may have been made with rivets or bolts
through plates and angles. Fig. 7.33 depicts typical I-shape girders.
   Plate girders are commonly used for long spans where they cost less than rolled
W shapes or where members are required with greater depths or thinner webs than
those available with rolled W shapes. The AISC LRFD ‘‘Specification for Structural
Steel for Buildings’’ distinguished between a plate girder and a beam in that a plate
7.68                               SECTION SEVEN




                 FIGURE 7.33 Plate girders: (a) welded (b) bolted.



girder has web stiffeners or a web with hc / tw ⬎ 970 / 兹Fy, or both, where hc is
twice the distance from the neutral axis to (1) the inside face of the compression
flange when it is welded to the web or (2) the nearest line of fasteners to the
compression flange when the web-flange connection is bolted.


7.21.1   ASD Procedure for Plate Girders

Allowable stresses for tension, compression, bending, and shear are the same for
plate girders as those given in Arts. 7.18 to 7.20, except where stiffeners are used.
But reductions in allowable stress are required under some conditions, and there
are limitations on the proportions of girder components.

Web Depth-Thickness Limits. The ratio of the clear distance h between flanges,
in, to web thickness t, in, is limited by
                                h      14,000
                                  ⱕ                                           (7.25)
                                t   兹Fy(Fy ⫹ 16.5)

where Fy is the specified yield stress of the compression flange steel, ksi (Table
7.17). When, however, transverse stiffeners are provided at spacings not exceeding
1.5 times the girder depth, the limit on h / t is increased to
                                     h 2,000
                                       ⱕ                                      (7.26)
                                     t   兹Fy
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.69


TABLE 7.17 Limiting Depth-Thickness Ratios for ASD of Plate-Girder Webs

                h/t               h/t                               h/t          h/t
Fy, ksi      Eq. (7.25)        Eq. (7.26)        Fy, ksi         Eq. (7.25)   Eq. (7.26)
 36.0           322                  333           60.0             207          258
 42.0           282                  309           65.0             192          248
 45.0           266                  298           90.0             143          211
 50.0           243                  283          100.0             130          200
 55.0           223                  270



General Design Method. Plate girders may be proportioned to resist bending on
the assumption that the moment of inertia of the gross cross section is effective.
No deductions need be made for fastener holes, unless the holes reduce the gross
area of either flange by more than 15%. When they do, the excess should be
deducted.
    Hybrid girders, which have higher-strength steel in the flanges than in the web,
may also be proportioned by the moment of inertia of the gross section when they
are not subjected to an axial force greater than 15% of the product of yield stress
of the flange steel and the area of the gross section. At any given section, the
flanges must have the same cross-sectional area and be made of the same grade of
steel.
    The allowable compressing bending stress Fb for plate girders must be reduced
from that given in Art. 7.20 where h / t exceeds 760 / 兹Fb. For greater values of this
ratio, the allowable compressive bending stress, except for hybrid girders, becomes

                                冋
                      Fb⬘ ⱕ Fb 1 ⫺ 0.0005
                                                Aw h
                                                Aƒ t冉⫺
                                                       760
                                                       兹Fb
                                                                 冊册              (7.27)

where Aw ⫽ the web area, in2 and Aƒ ⫽ the compression flange area, in2.
   For hybrid girders, not only is the allowable compressive bending stress limited
to that given by Eq. (7.24), but also the maximum stress in either flange may not
exceed

                          F⬘b ⫽ Fb   冋     12 ⫹ 2(Aw / Aƒ)   册
                                       12 ⫹ (Aw / Aƒ)(3␣ ⫺ ␣3)
                                                                                 (7.28)

where a ⫽ ratio of web yield stress to flange yield stress.

Flange Limitations. The projecting elements of the compression flange must
comply with the limitations for b / t given in Art. 7.21. The area of cover plates,
where used, should not exceed 0.70 times the total flange area. Partial-length cover
plates (Fig. 7.33b) should extend beyond the theoretical cutoff point a sufficient
distance to develop their share of bending stresses at the cutoff point. Preferably
for welded-plate girders, the flange should consist of a series of plates, which may
differ in thickness and width, joined end to end with complete-penetration groove
welds (Fig. 7.33a).

Bearing Stiffeners. These are required on girder webs at unframed ends. They
may also be needed at concentrated loads, including supports. Set in pairs, bearing
stiffeners may be angles or plates placed on opposite sides of the web, usually
normal to the bending axis. Angles are attached with one leg against the web. Plates
7.70                               SECTION SEVEN


are welded perpendicular to the web. The stiffeners should have close bearing
against the flanges through which they receive their loads, and should extend nearly
to the edges of the flanges.
    These stiffeners are designed as columns, with allowable stresses as given in
Art. 7.19. The column section is assumed to consist of a pair of stiffeners and a
strip of girder web with width 25 times web thickness for interior stiffeners and 12
times web thickness at ends. In computing the effective slenderness ratio Kl / r, use
an effective length Kl of at least 0.75 the length of the stiffeners.

Intermediate Stiffeners. With properly spaced transverse stiffeners strong enough
to act as compression members, a plate-girder web can carry loads far in excess of
its buckling load. The girders acts, in effect, like a Pratt truss, with the stiffeners
as struts and the web forming fields of diagonal tension. The following formulas
for stiffeners are based on this behavior. Like bearing stiffeners, intermediate stiff-
eners are placed to project normal to the web and the bending axis, but they may
consist of a single angle or plate. They may be stopped short of the tension flange
a distance up to 4 times the web thickness. If the compression flange is a rectangular
plate, single stiffeners must be attached to it to prevent the plate from twisting.
When lateral bracing is attached to stiffeners, they must be connected to the com-
pression flange to transmit at least 1% of the total flange stress, except when the
flange consists only of angles.
    The total shear force, kips, divided by the web area, in2, for any panel between
stiffeners should not exceed the allowable shear Fv given by Eqs. (7.29a) and
(7.29b).
    Except for hybrid girders, when Cv is less than unity:

                  Fv ⫽
                          Fy
                         2.89 冋
                              Cv ⫽
                                        1 ⫺ Cv
                                   1.15 兹1 ⫹ (a / h)3
                                                         册
                                                      ⱕ 0.4Fy                  (7.29a)

For hybrid girders or when Cv is more than unity or when intermediate stiffeners
are omitted:
                                         FyCv
                                  Fv ⫽        ⱕ 0.4Fy                          (7.29b)
                                         2.89
where a ⫽ clear distance between transverse stiffeners, in
      h ⫽ clear distance between flanges within an unstiffened segment, in
          45,000k
     Cv ⫽            when Cv is less than 0.8
          Fy(h / t)2
         ⫽ 190
                 冪
                 k
           h / t Fv
                    when Cv is more than 0.8
       t ⫽ web thickness, in
       k ⫽ 5.34 ⫹ 4(a / h)2 when a / h ⬎ 1
         ⫽ 4 ⫹ 5.34(a / h)2 when a / h ⬍ 1

    Stiffeners for an end panel or for any panel containing large holes and for
adjacent panels should be so spaced that the largest average web shear ƒv in the
panel does not exceed the allowable shear given in Eq. (7.29b).
    Intermediate stiffeners are not required when h / t is less than 260 and ƒv is less
than the allowable stress given by Eq. (7.29b). When these criteria are not satisfied,
stiffeners should be spaced so that the applicable allowable shear, Eq. (7.29a) or
                           STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                 7.71


(7.29b), is not exceeded, and in addition, so that a / h is not more than [260 / (h / t)]2
or 3.
   Solution of the preceding formulas for stiffener spacing requires assumptions of
dimensions and trials. The calculations can be facilitated by using tables in the
AISC ‘‘Manual of Steel Construction.’’ Also, Fig. 7.34 permits rapid selection of
the most efficient stiffener arrangement, for webs of A36 steel. Similar charts can
be drawn for other steels.
   If the tension field concept is to apply to plate girder design, care is necessary
to ensure that the intermediate stiffeners function as struts. When these stiffeners
are spaced to satisfy Eq. (7.29a), their gross area, in2 (total area if in pairs) should
be at least




 FIGURE 7.34 Plate girder web design. Chart shows the relationship between allowable shears
 in web of plate girders, with yield stress Fy ⫽ 36 ksi, and web thickness, distance between
 flanges, and stiffener spacing.
7.72                                 SECTION SEVEN



                      Ast ⫽
                                 2    冋
                               1 ⫺ Cv a
                                        ⫺
                                          (a / h)2
                                      h 兹1 ⫹ (a / h)2
                                                      YDht   册                    (7.30)

where Y ⫽ ratio of yield stress of web steel to yield stress of stiffener steel
      D ⫽ 1.0 for stiffeners in pairs
        ⫽ 1.8 for single-angle stiffeners
        ⫽ 2.4 for single-plate stiffeners

When the greatest shear stress ƒv in a panel is less than Fv determined from Eq.
(7.29a), the gross area of the stiffeners may be reduced in the ratio ƒv / Fv.
   The moment of inertia of a stiffener or pair of stiffeners, about the web axis,
should be at least (h / 50)4. The connection of these stiffeners to the web should be
capable of developing shear, in kips per lineal inch of single stiffener or pair, of at
least


                                               冪冉 冊
                                                         3
                                                Fyw
                                   ƒvs ⫽ h                                        (7.31)
                                                340

where Fyw is the yield stress of the web steel (Table 7.18). This shear also may be
reduced in the ratio ƒv / Fv as above.

                    TABLE 7.18 Required Shear Capacity of
                    Intermediate-Stiffener Connections to Girder
                    Web

                                  ƒvg, kips                  ƒvg, kips
                    Fyw, ksi      per lin in    Fyw, ksi     per lin in
                      36.0         0.034h         60.0        0.074h
                      42.0         0.043h         65.0        0.084h
                      45.0         0.048h         90.0        0.136h
                      50.0         0.056h        100.0        0.160h
                      55.0         0.065h


Combined Stresses in Web. A check should be made for combined shear and
bending in the web where the tensile bending stress is approximately equal to the
maximum permissible. When ƒv, the shear force at the section divided by the web
area, is greater than that permitted by Eq. (7.29a), the tensile bending stress in the
web should be limited to no more than 0.6Fyw or Fyw(0.825 ⫺ 0.375ƒv / Fv), where
Fv is the allowable web shear given by Eq. (7.29a). For girders with steel flanges
and webs with Fy exceeding 65 ksi, when the flange bending stress is more than
75% of the allowable, the allowable shear stress in the web should not exceed that
given by Eq. (7.22).
   Also, the compressive stresses in the web should be checked (see Art. 7.22).



7.21.2   LRFD Procedure for Plate Girders

Plate girders are normally proportioned to resist bending on the assumption that
the moment of inertia of the gross section is effective. The web must be propor-
                           STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.73


tioned such that the maximum web depth-thickness ratio h / t does not exceed h / t
given by (7.32) or (7.33), whichever is applicable.
   If a / h ⱕ 1.5,
                                       h   2000
                                         ⱕ                                         (7.32)
                                       t   兹Fyƒ

   If a / h ⬎ 1.5,
                                 h      14,000
                                   ⱕ                                               (7.33)
                                 t   兹Fyƒ( Fyƒ ⫹ Fr)

where a   ⫽   clear distance between transverse stiffeners, in
      t   ⫽   web thickness, in
    Fyƒ   ⫽   specified minimum yield stress of steel, ksi
     Fr   ⫽   compressive residual stress in flange ⫽ 16.5 ksi for plate girders
Web stiffeners are frequently required to achieve an economical design. However,
web stiffeners are not required if h / t ⬍ 260 and adequate shear strength is provided
by the web. The criteria for the design of plate girders are given in the AISC LRFD
Specification.

Design Flexural Strength. The design flexural strength is ␾bMn, where ␾b ⫽ 0.90.
If hc / t ⱕ 970 兹Fy, determine the nominal flexural strength as indicated in Art.
7.15, for either compact or noncompact shapes. If hc / t ⬎ 970 兹Fy, Mn is governed
by the limit states of tension-flange yielding or compression-flange buckling.
   The design strength is the smaller of the values of ␾bMn for yielding of the
tension flange, which is
                                ␾bMn ⫽ 0.90SxtRPGReFyt                             (7.34)
and for buckling of the compression flange, which is
                               ␾bMn ⫽ 0.90Sxc RPGReFcr                             (7.35)
where RPG ⫽ plate-girder bending-strength reduction factor
           ⫽ 1 ⫺ 0.0005ar(hc / t ⫺ 970 / 兹Fcr) ⱕ 1.0
       Re ⫽ hybrid girder factor
           ⫽ 1 ⫺ 0.1(1.3 ⫹ ar)(0.81 ⫺ m) ⱕ 1.0
           ⫽ 1 for nonhybrid girders
        ar ⫽ ratio of web area to compression-flange area
        m ⫽ ratio of web yield stress to flange yield stress or to Fcr
       Fcr ⫽ critical compression-flange stress, ksi
       Fyt ⫽ yield stress of tension flange, ksi
       Sxt ⫽ section modulus, in3, with respect to the tension flange
       Sxc ⫽ section modulus, in3, with respect to the compression flange
The critical stress Fcr is different for different limit states. Its value is computed
from the values of parameters that depend on the type of limit state: plate girder
coefficient CPG, slenderness parameter ␭, limiting slenderness parameter ␭p for a
compact element, and limiting slenderness parameter ␭, for a noncompact element.
Thus, Fcr may be computed from one of Eqs. (7.34) to (7.36) for the limit states
7.74                               SECTION SEVEN


of lateral-torsional buckling and flange local buckling. The limit state of local buck-
ling of web does not apply.

                               Fcr ⫽ Fyƒ      ␭ ⱕ ␭p                            (7.36)

                           冋 冉
             Fcr ⫽ CbFyƒ 1 ⫺
                                 1 ␭ ⫺ ␭p
                                 2 ␭r ⫺ ␭p   冊册   ⱕ Fyƒ     ␭p ⬍ ␭ ⱕ ␭r         (7.37)

                           Fcr ⫽ CPG / ␭2     ␭ ⬎ ␭r                            (7.38)

where Fyƒ ⫽ specified minimum flange yield stress, ksi
      Cb ⫽ bending coefficient dependent on moment gradient
           ⫽ 1.75 ⫹ 1.05(M1 / M2) ⫹ 0.3(M1 / M2)2 for lateral-torsional buckling
           ⫽ 1 for flange local buckling
     CPG ⫽ 286,000 / Cb for lateral torsional buckling
           ⫽ 11,200 for flange local buckling
        ␭ ⫽ Lb / rT for lateral-torsional buckling
           ⫽ bƒ / 2tƒ for flange local buckling
       Lb ⫽ laterally unbraced length of girder, in
       rT ⫽ radius of gyration, in, of compression flange plus one-sixth the web
       bƒ ⫽ flange width, in
        tƒ ⫽ flange thickness, in
       ␭p ⫽ 300 / 兹Fyƒ for lateral-torsional buckling
           ⫽ 65 / 兹Fyƒ for flange local buckling
       ␭r ⫽ 756 / 兹Fyƒ for lateral-torsional buckling
           ⫽ 150 / 兹Fyƒ for flange local buckling

Design Shear Strength. This is given by ␾vVn, where ␾v ⫽ 0.90. With tension-
field action, in which the web is permitted to buckle due to diagonal compression
and the web carries stresses in diagonal tension in the panels between vertical
stiffeners, the design shear strength is larger than when such action is not permitted.
    Tension-field action is not allowed for end panels in nonhybrid plate girders, for
all panels in hybrid girders and plate girders with tapered webs, and for panels in
which the ratio of panel width to depth a / h exceeds 3.0 or [260(h / t)]2, where t is
the web thickness. For these conditions, the design shear strength is given by

                    ␾nVn ⫽ 0.90 ⫻ 0.6AwFywCv ⫽ 0.54AwFywCv                      (7.39)

where Aw ⫽ web area, in2
     Fyw ⫽ specified web yield stress, ksi
      Cv ⫽ ratio of critical web stress, in the linear buckling theory, to the shear
           yield stress of the web steel

   For tension-field action, the design shear strength depends on the ratio of panel
width to depth a / h. For h / t ⱕ 187兹k / Fyw,

                                 ␾vVn ⫽ 0.54AwFyw                               (7.40)

For h / t ⬎ 187兹k / Fyw,
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                             7.75



                                        冉
                    ␾vVn ⫽ 0.54AwFyw Cv ⫹
                                                    1 ⫺ Cv
                                                1.15兹1 ⫹ (a / h)2
                                                                   冊              (7.41)

where k ⫽ web buckling coefficient
        ⫽ 5 if a / h ⬎ 0.3 or a / h ⬎ [260 / (h / t)]2
        ⫽ 5 ⫹ 5 / (a / h)2 otherwise
          187兹k / Fyw
     Cv ⫽                 when 187兹k / Fyw ⱕ h / t ⱕ 234兹k / Fyw
                 h/t
          44,000 k
        ⫽                when h / t ⬎ 234兹k / Fyw
           (h / t)2 Fy

Web Stiffeners. Transverse stiffeners are required if the web shear strength with-
out stiffeners is inadequate, if h / t ⬎ 418 / 兹Fyw, or if h / t does not meet the re-
quirements of Eqs. (7.30) and (7.31). Where stiffeners are required, the spacing of
stiffeners should be close enough to maintain the shear within allowable limits.
Also, the moment of inertia Ist, in4, of a transverse stiffener should be at least that
computed from

                                       Ist ⫽ at3j                                 (7.42)

where j ⫽ 2.5 / (a / h)2 ⫺ 2.
   The moment of inertia for a pair of stiffeners should be taken about an axis
through the center of the web. For a single stiffener, Ist should be taken about the
web face in contact with the stiffener. In addition, for design for tension-field action,
the stiffener area Ast, in2, should be at least that computed from

                  Ast ⫽
                          Fyw
                          Fys冋                V
                              0.15Dht(1 ⫺ Cv) u ⫺ 18t2 ⱖ 0
                                             ␾uVn              册                  (7.43)

where Fys ⫽ specified yield stress of stiffener, ksi
      Vu ⫽ required shear strength at stiffener, kips, calculated for the factored
            loads
       D ⫽ 1.0 for a pair of stiffeners
          ⫽ 1.8 for a single-angle stiffener
          ⫽ 2.4 for a single-plate stiffener

Bending and Shear Interaction. Plate girders should also be proportioned to sat-
isfy Eq. (7.43) if they are designed for tension-field action, stiffeners are required,
and Vu / Mu lies between 60 and 133% of Vn / Mn.

                                 Mu        V
                                    ⫹ 0.625 u ⱕ 1.24                              (7.44)
                                 Mn        Vn

where Mn ⫽ design flexural strength
      Mu ⫽ required flexural strength calculated for the factored loads but may
           not exceed 0.90Mn
      Vn ⫽ design shear strength
      Vu ⫽ required shear strength calculated for the factored loads but may not
           exceed 0.90Vn
7.76                                 SECTION SEVEN


7.22     WEB OR FLANGE LOAD-BEARING
         STIFFENERS

Members subject to large concentrated loads within their length or large end re-
actions should be proportioned so that the forces on the web or flange cannot cause
local failure or the webs or flanges should be stiffened to carry the concentrated
loads. Both ASD and LRFD procedures include design criteria.


7.22.1   ASD for Load-Bearing Stiffeners

Webs of rolled beams and plate girders should be so proportioned that the com-
pressive stress, ksi, at the web toe of the fillets does not exceed
                                         Fa ⫽ 0.66Fy                                (7.45)
where Fy ⫽ specified minimum yield stress, ksi.
   Web failure probably would be in the form of buckling caused by concentrated
loading, either at an interior load or at the supports. The capacity of the web to
transmit the forces safely should be checked.

                                                 Load Distribution. Loads are resisted
                                                 not only by the part of the web directly
                                                 under them but also by the parts im-
                                                 mediately adjacent. A 45⬚ distribution
                                                 usually is assumed, as indicated in Fig.
                                                 7.35 for two common conditions. The
                                                 distance k is determined by the point
                                                 where the fillet of the flange joins the
                                                 web; it is tabulated in the beam tables
                                                 of the AISC ‘‘Manual of Steel Construc-
FIGURE 7.35 Web crippling in a simple            tion.’’ Fa is applicable to the horizontal
beam. The critical web section is assumed to     web strip of length b ⫹ k at the end
occur at the fillet.                             support or b ⫹ 2k under an interior load.
                                                 Bearing stiffeners are required when Fa
                                                 is exceeded.

Bearing atop Webs. The sum of the compression stresses resulting from loads
bearing directly on or through a flange on the compression edge of a plate-girder
web should not exceed the following:
   When the flange is restrained against rotation, the allowable compressive stress,
ksi, is

                                    冋
                             Fa ⫽ 5.5 ⫹
                                                  4
                                               (a / h)册
                                                      2
                                                        10,000
                                                         (h / t)2
                                                                                    (7.46)

   When the flange is not restrained against rotation,

                                     冋
                              Fa ⫽ 2 ⫹
                                                4
                                             (a / h)2册10,000
                                                       (h / t)2
                                                                                    (7.47)
                            STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                         7.77


where a ⫽ clear distance between transverse stiffeners, in
      h ⫽ clear distance between flanges, in
      t ⫽ web thickness, in
   The load may be considered distributed over a web length equal to the panel
length (distance between vertical stiffeners) or girder depth, whichever is less.

Web Stiffeners on Columns. The web of a column may also be subject to crip-
pling by the thrust from the compression flange of a rigidly connected beam, as
shown at point a in Fig. 7.36. Likewise, to ensure full development of the beam
plastic moment, the column flange opposite the tensile thrust at point b may require
stiffening.
    When stiffeners having a combined cross-sectional area Ast, in2, are required on
the column whenever Ast computed from Eq. (7.48) is positive
                                         P ⫺ Fyct(tb ⫹ 5k)
                                 Ast ⫽                                           (7.48)
                                               Fys
where t   ⫽
          thickness of column web, in
     tb   ⫽
          thickness, in, of beam flange delivering concentrated load
    Fyc   ⫽
          column steel yield stress, ksi
    Fys   ⫽
          stiffener steel yield stress, ksi
     P    ⫽
          computed force delivered by beam flange or connection plate multiplied
          by 5⁄3 when force is a result of dead and live loads, or by 4⁄3 when it is
          a result of wind or earthquake forces, kips
      k ⫽ distance from face of column to edge of fillet on rolled sections (use
          equivalent for welded sections)
Regardless of the preceding requirement, a single or double stiffener is needed
opposite the compression force delivered to the column at point a when




          FIGURE 7.36 Web crippling in a column at a welded joint with a beam.
7.78                                SECTION SEVEN


                                         4100 t3 兹Fyc
                                  dc ⬎                                            (7.49)
                                                P
where dc ⫽ clear distance, in, between column flanges (clear of fillets). Also, a pair
of stiffeners is needed opposite the tension force at point b when


                                     tƒ ⬍ 0.4   冪FP yc
                                                                                  (7.50)

where tƒ ⫽ thickness of column flange, in.
   The thickness of a stiffener should not be less than one-half the thickness of the
beam flange or plate that delivers force P to the column. Stiffener width should not
be less than one-third of the flange or plate width.


7.22.2   LRFD for Load-Bearing Stiffeners

Six limit states should be considered at locations where a large concentrated force
acting on a member introduces high local stresses. These limit states are local flange
bending, local web yielding, web crippling, sidesway web buckling, compression
buckling of the web, and high shear in column web panels. Detailed requirements
for determining the design strength for each of these limit states are contained in
the AISC LRFD ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel for Buildings.’’
   When web stiffeners are required to prevent web crippling or compression buck-
ling of the web, they are designed as columns with an effective length of Kl ⫽
0.75h, where h is the clear distance between flanges. The effective cross section is
the area of the stiffeners plus 25t for interior stiffeners for 12t for stiffeners at the
end of a member, where t is the web thickness.



7.23     BEARING

For bearing on finished surfaces, such as milled ends and ends of fitted bearing
stiffeners, or on the projected area of pins in finished holes, the allowable stress in
ASD is
                                     Fp ⫽ 0.90Fy                                  (7.51)
where Fy is the specified minimum yield stress of the steel, ksi. When the parts in
contact have different yield stresses, use the smaller Fy (Table 7.19).
   The allowable bearing stress on expansion rollers and rockers, kip / in, is
                                         Fy ⫺ 13
                                 Fp ⫽            0.66d                            (7.52)
                                            20
where d is the diameter of roller or rocker, in (Table 7.20).
    Allowable bearing stresses on masonry usually can be obtained from a local or
state building code, whichever governs. In the absence of such regulations, however,
the values in Table 7.21 may be used.
                           STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                          7.79


                      TABLE 7.19 Bearing on Finished
                      Surfaces, ksi

                          Allowable                     Design strength
                        stress (ASD)                       (LRFD)
                      Fy              Fp             Fy            ␾Rn / Apb
                      36             32.4            36               54.0
                      42             37.8            42               63.0
                      45             40.5            45               67.5
                      50             45.0            50               75.0
                      55             49.5            55               82.5
                      60             54.0            60               90.0



                      TABLE 7.20 Allowable Bearing Loads on
                      Expansion Rollers or Rockers, kips per in
                      of Bearing

                            Allowable                     Design strength
                           load (ASD)                        (LRFD)
                      Fy               Fp                 Fy            ␾R*
                                                                          n

                      36             0.76d              36             1.30d
                      42             0.96d              42             1.64d
                      45             1.06d              45             1.81d
                      50             1.22d              50             2.08d
                      55             1.39d              55             2.37d
                      60             1.55d              60             2.64d
                           * d is the diameter, in. of the roller or rocker.



             TABLE 7.21 Allowable Bearing on Masonry, ksi

             On sandstone and limestone             0.40
             On brick in cement mortar              0.25
             On the full area of concrete           0.35ƒ⬘c
             On less than full concrete area        0.35ƒc⬘ 兹A2/A1 ⱕ 0.7ƒc⬘
             where ƒ⬘c ⫽ specified compressive strength, ksi, of the concrete
                   A1 ⫽ bearing area
                   A2 ⫽ concrete area



LRFD Procedure for Bearing. The design strength in bearing on the projected
bearing area for finished surfaces, such as milled ends and ends of bearing stiffeners,
or on the projected area of pins in finished holes, is ␾Rn, where ␾ ⫽ 0.75.
                                        Rn ⫽ 2.0Fy Apb                          (7.53)
where Fy is the lesser minimum yield stress, ksi, of the steel (Table 7.19) and Apb
is the projected bearing area, in2.
7.80                              SECTION SEVEN


   For expansion rollers and rockers, Rn, kips, is given by
                             Rn ⫽ 1.5(Fy ⫺ 13)Ld / 20                         (7.54)
where L is the length, in, of bearing, and d is the diameter, in (see Table 7.20).


7.24     COMBINED AXIAL COMPRESSION AND
         BENDING

A member carrying both axial and bending forces is subjected to secondary bending
moments resulting from the axial force and the displacement of the neutral axis.
This effect is referred to as the P-⌬ effect. Such secondary bending moments are
more critical in members where the axial force is a compressive force, because the
P-⌬ secondary moment increases the deflection of the member. In ASD, the effects
of these secondary moments may be neglected where the axial force is a tensile
force or where the actual compressive stress is less than 15% of the allowable
compressive stress. LRFD does not include this concept.
   The following design criteria apply to singly and doubly symmetrical members.


7.24.1   ASD for Compression and Bending

When the computed axial stress, ƒa is less than 15% of Fa, the stress that would
be permitted if axial force alone were present, a straight-line interaction formula
may be used. Thus, when ƒa / Fa ⱕ 0.15:
                               ƒa   ƒbx   ƒby
                                  ⫹     ⫹     ⱕ 1.0                           (7.55)
                               Fa Fbx Fby
where subscripts x and y indicate, respectively, the major and minor axes of bending
(if bending is about only one axis, then the term for the other axis is omitted), and
   ƒb ⫽ computed compressive bending stress, ksi, at point under consideration
   Fb ⫽ compressive bending stress, ksi, that is allowed if bending alone existed
   When ƒa / Fa ⬎ 0.15, the effect of the secondary bending moment should be
taken into account and the member proportioned to satisfy Eqs. (7.56a) and (7.56b)
where, as before, subscripts x and y indicates axes of bending:
                  ƒa     Cmxƒbx             Cmyƒby
                     ⫹                 ⫹                   ⱕ 1.0             (7.56a)
                  Fa [1 ⫺ ƒa / F⬘ex]Fbx [1 ⫺ ƒa / F⬘ey]Fby

                                   ƒa    ƒbx   ƒby
                                       ⫹     ⫹     ⱕ 1.0                     (7.56b)
                                 0.60Fy Fbx Fby

                                               12␲ 2E
                                     F⬘e ⫽                                    (7.57)
                                             23(Klb / rb)2
where E ⫽ modulus of elasticity, 29,000 ksi
      Ib ⫽ actual unbraced length, in, in the plane of bending
                             STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                       7.81


      rb ⫽ corresponding radius of gyration, in
      K ⫽ effective-length factor in the plane of bending
     Cm ⫽ reduction factor determined from the following conditions:
   1. For compression members in frames subject to joint translation (sidesway),
Cm ⫽ 0.85.
   2. For restrained compression members in frames braced against joint translation
and not subject to transverse loading between their supports in the plane of bending,
Cm ⫽ 0.6 ⫺ 0.4M1 / M2, but not less than 0.4. M1 / M2 is the ratio of the smaller to
larger moments at the ends of that portion of the member unbraced in the plane of
bending under consideration. M1 / M2 is positive when the member is bent in reverse
curvature, and negative when it is bent in single curvature.
   3. For compression members in frames braced against joint translation in the
plane of loading and subjected to transverse loading between their supports, the
value of Cm may be determined by rational analysis. Instead, however, Cm may be
taken as 0.85 for members whose ends are restrained, and 1.0 for ends unrestrained.
   In wind and seismic design F⬘e may be increased one-third. The resultant section,
however, should not be less than that required for dead and live loads alone without
the increase in allowable stress.
   Additional information, including illustrations of the foregoing three conditions
for determining the value of Cm, is given in the AISC ‘‘Commentary’’ on the AISC
ASD ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel for Buildings.’’


7.24.2   LRFD for Compression and Bending

Members subject to both axial compression and bending stresses should be pro-
portioned to satisfy Eq. (7.58) or (7.59), whichever is applicable.
   For (Pu / ␾c Pn) ⱖ 0.2,

                          Pu
                              ⫹     冉
                                8 Mux
                                      ⫹
                                        Muy
                         ␾c Pn 9 ␾bMnx ␾bMny
                                             ⱕ 1.0  冊                          (7.58)

   For (Pu / ␾c Pn) ⬍ 0.2,

                          Pu
                         2␾c Pn
                                ⫹   冉
                                   Mux
                                       ⫹
                                         Muy
                                  ␾bMnx ␾bMny
                                              ⱕ 1.0 冊                          (7.59)

where Pu ⫽ required compressive strength, kips, calculated for the factored axial
           loads
     Mu ⫽ required flexural strength, kip-in calculated for primary bending and
           P-⌬ effects
    ␾cPn ⫽ design compressive strength (Art. 7.19.3)
   ␾bMn ⫽ design flexural strength (Art. 7.20.2)
   Mu may be determined for the factored loads from a second-order elastic anal-
ysis. The AISC LRFD specification, however, permits Mu to be determined from
Eq. (7.60) with the variables in this equation determined from a first-order analysis.
                                  Mu ⫽ B1Mnt ⫹ B2Mlt                           (7.60)
7.82                                 SECTION SEVEN


where Mnt ⫽ required flexural strength, kip-in, with no relative displacement of the
            member ends; for example, for a column that is part of a rigid frame,
            drift is assumed prevented
      Mlt ⫽ required flexural strength, kip-in, for the effects only of drift as de-
            termined from a first-order analysis
      B1 ⫽ magnification factor for Mnt to account for the P-⌬ effects
                Cm
          ⫽
            1 ⫺ Pu / Pe
      Cm ⫽ reduction factor defined for Eq. (7.57)
      B2 ⫽ magnification factor for Mlt to account for the P-⌬ effects

B2 may be calculated from either Eq. (7.61) or (7.62), the former usually being the
simpler to evaluate.

                                            1
                              B2 ⫽                                            (7.61)
                                     1 ⫺ (兺Pu / 兺HL)⌬oh

                                          1
                              B2 ⫽                                            (7.62)
                                     1 ⫺ 兺Pu / 兺Pe

where 兺Pu   ⫽   sum of the axial-load strengths, kips, of all the columns in a story
       Pe   ⫽   AgFy / ␭2c
       Ag   ⫽   gross area of member, in2
       Fy   ⫽   specified yield stress, ksi

                   冪          冪
                Kl Fy Kl              Fy
        ␭c ⫽               ⫽
                r␲ E          r 286,220
         K⫽     effective column length factor in the plane of bending, to be deter-
                mined by structural analysis, but not to exceed unity in calculation
                of B1 and not to be less than unity in calculation of B2
         r⫽     governing radius of gyration, in, about the plane of buckling
       ⌬oh ⫽    drift, in, of the story in which the column is located
        L⫽      story height, in
       兺H ⫽     sum of all the horizontal forces on the story that cause ⌬oh




7.25   COMBINED AXIAL TENSION AND
       BENDING

For ASD, members subject to both axial tension and bending stresses should be
proportioned to satisfy Eq. (7.55), with ƒb and Fb, respectively, as the computed
and allowable bending tensile stress. But the compressive bending stresses must not
exceed the values given in Art. 7.20.1.

LRFD for Tension and Bending. Symmetric members subject to both axial ten-
sion and bending stresses should be proportioned to satisfy either Eq. (7.58) or Eq.
(7.59), whichever is applicable.
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                               7.83


7.26   COMPOSITE CONSTRUCTION

In composite construction, rolled or built-up steel shapes are combined with rein-
forced concrete to form a structural member. Examples of this type of construction
include: (a) concrete-encased steel beams (Fig. 7.37c), (b) concrete decks interactive
with steel beams (Fig. 7.37a and b), (c) concrete encased steel columns, and (d )
concrete filled steel columns. The most common use of this type of construction is
for composite beams, where the steel beam supports and works with the concrete
slab to form an economical building element.
   Design procedures require that a decision be made regarding the use of shoring
for the deck pour. (Procedures for ASD and LRFD differ in this regard.) If shoring
is not used, the steel beam must carry all dead loads applied until the concrete
hardens, even if full plastic capacity is permitted for the composite section after-
ward.
   The assumed composite cross section is the same for ASD and LRFD proce-
dures. The effective width of the slab is governed by beam span and beam spacing
or edge distance (Fig. 7.37a and b).
   Slab compressive stresses are seldom critical for interior beams but should be
investigated, especially for edge beams. Thickening the slab key and minimum
requirements for strength of concrete can be economical.




   FIGURE 7.37 Steel-concrete composite-beam construction: (a) and (b) with welded-stud
   shear connectors; (c) with encasement in concrete.
7.84                                SECTION SEVEN


Connector Details. In composite construction, shear connectors welded to the top
flange of the steel beam are typically used to ensure composite action by transfer-
ring shear between the concrete deck and steel beam. Location, spacing, and size
limitations for shear connectors are the same for ASD and LRFD procedures. Con-
nectors, except those installed in ribs of formed steel decks, should have a minimum
lateral concrete cover of 1 in. The diameter of a stud connector, unless located
directly over the beam web, is limited to 2.5 times the thickness of the beam flange
to which it is welded. Minimum center-to-center stud spacing is 6 diameters along
the longitudinal axis, 4 diameters transversely. Studs may be spaced uniformly,
rather than in proportion to horizontal shear, inasmuch as tests show a redistribution
of shear under high loads similar to the stress redistribution in large bolted joints.
Maximum spacing is 8 times the slab thickness.

Formed Steel Decking. Concrete slabs are frequently cast on permanent steel
decking with a ribbed, corrugated, cellular, or blended cellular cross section (see
Sec. 8). Two distinct composite-design configurations are inherent: ribs parallel or
ribs perpendicular to the supporting beams or girders (Fig. 7.38) The design pro-
cedures, for both ASD and LRFD, prescribed for composite concrete-slab and steel-
beam construction are also applicable for systems utilizing formed steel decking,
subject to additional requirements of the AISC ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel
for Buildings’’ and as illustrated in Fig. 7.38.




FIGURE 7.38 Steel-concrete composite-beam construction with formed steel decking: (a) ribs
parallel to beam; (b) ribs transverse to beam [refer to (a) for applicable requirements].
                           STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                          7.85


Shear and Deflection of Composite Beams. In ASD and LRFD, shear forces are
assumed to be resisted by the steel beam. Deflections are calculated based on com-
posite section properties. It should be noted that, because of creep of the concrete,
the actual deflections of composite beams under long-term loads, such as dead load,
will be greater than those computed.


7.26.1   ASD of Encased Beams

Two design methods are allowed for encased beams. In one method, stresses are
computed on the assumption that the steel beam alone supports all the dead load
applied prior to concrete hardening (unless the beam is temporarily shored), and
the composite beam supports the remaining dead and live loads. Then, for positive
bending moments, the total stress, ksi, on the steel-beam bottom flange is
                                      MD ML
                               ƒb ⫽     ⫹    ⱕ 0.66Fy                           (7.63)
                                      S   St
where Fy   ⫽   specified yield stress of the steel, ksi
     MD    ⫽   dead-load bending moment, kip-in
     ML    ⫽   live-load bending moment, kip-in
       S   ⫽   section modulus of steel beam, in3
      St   ⫽   section modulus of transformed section, in3. To obtain the transformed
               equivalent steel area, divide the effective concrete area by the modular
               ratio n (modulus of elasticity of steel divided by modulus of elasticity
               of concrete). In computation of effective concrete area, use effective
               width of concrete slab (Fig. 7.37a and b)
The stress 0.66Fy is allowed because the steel beam is restrained against lateral
buckling.
   The second method stems from a ‘‘shortcut’’ provision contained in many build-
ing codes. This provision simply permits higher bending stresses in beams encased
in concrete. For example,
                                      MD ⫹ ML
                               ƒb ⫽           ⱕ 0.76Fy                          (7.64)
                                         S
This higher stress would not be realized, however, because of composite action.


7.26.2   ASD of Beams with Shear Connectors

For composite construction where shear connectors transfer shear between slab and
beam, the design is based on behavior at ultimate load. It assumes that all loads
are resisted by the composite section, even if shores are not used during construction
to support the steel beam until the concrete gains strength. For this case, the com-
puted stress in the bottom flange for positive bending moment is
                                      MD ⫹ ML
                               ƒb ⫽           ⱕ 0.66Fy                          (7.65)
                                         St
where St ⫽ section modulus, in3, of transformed section of composite beam. To
7.86                              SECTION SEVEN


prevent overstressing the bottom flange of the steel beam when temporary shoring
is omitted, a limitation is placed on the value of St used in computation of ƒb with
Eq. (7.65):

                                 冉
                            St ⱕ 1.35 ⫹ 0.35
                                                     ML
                                                       冊S
                                                     MD s
                                                                              (7.66)

where MD ⫽ moment, kip-in, due to loads applied prior to concrete hardening (75%
            cured)
      ML ⫽ moment, kip-in, due to remaining dead and live loads
       Ss ⫽ section modulus, in3, of steel beam alone relative to bottom flange

Shear on Connectors. Shear connectors usually are studs or channels. The total
horizontal shear to be taken by the connectors between the point of maximum
positive moment and each end of a simple beam, or the point of counterflexure in
a continuous beam, is the smaller of the values obtained from Eqs. (7.67) and (7.68).
                                          0.85ƒc⬘ Ac
                                   Vh ⫽                                       (7.67)
                                              2
                                          As Fy
                                   Vh ⫽                                       (7.68)
                                           2
where ƒ⬘c ⫽ specified strength of concrete, ksi
      Ac ⫽ actual area of effective concrete flange, as indicated in Fig. 7.36a and
            b, in2
      As ⫽ area of steel beam, in2
In continuous composite beams, where shear connectors are installed in negative-
moment regions, the longitudinal reinforcing steel in the concrete slab may be
considered to act compositely with the steel beam in those regions. In such cases,
the total horizontal shear to be resisted by the shear connectors between an interior
support and each adjacent infection point is
                                            AsrFyr
                                     Vh ⫽                                     (7.69)
                                              2
where Asr ⫽ total area, in2, of longitudinal reinforcing steel within the effective
            width of the concrete slab at the interior support
      Fyr ⫽ specified yield stress of the reinforcing steel, ksi
These formulas represent the horizontal shear at ultimate load divided by 2 to
approximate conditions at working load.

Number of Connectors. The minimum number of connectors N1, spaced uni-
formly between the point of maximum moment and adjacent points of zero moment,
is Vh / q, where q is the allowable shear load on a single connector, as given in
Table 7.22. Values in this table, however, are applicable only to concrete made with
aggregates conforming to ASTM C33. For concrete made with rotary-kiln-produced
aggregates conforming to ASTM C330 and with concrete weight of 90 pcf or more,
the allowable shear load for one connector is obtained by multiplying the values
in Table 7.22 by the factors in Table 7.23.
                               STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                       7.87


TABLE 7.22 Allowable Horizontal-Shear Loads, q, for Connectors, kips
(Applicable only to concrete made with ASTM C33 aggregates)

                    Connector                            ƒ⬘c ⫽ 3.0          ƒ⬘c ⫽ 3.5          ƒ⬘c ⱖ 4.0
1
 ⁄2-in dia. ⫻ 2-in hooked or headed stud*                 5.1                5.5                5.9
5
 ⁄8-in dia. ⫻ 21⁄2-in hooked or headed stud*              8.0                8.6                9.2
3
 ⁄4-in dia. ⫻ 3-in hooked or headed stud*                11.5               12.5               13.3
7
 ⁄8-in dia. ⫻ 31⁄2-in hooked or headed stud*             15.6               16.8               18.0
3-in channel, 4.1 lb                                      4.3w†              4.7w†              5.0w†
4-in channel, 5.4 lb                                      4.6w†              5.0w†              5.3w†
5-in channel, 6.7 lb                                      4.9w†              5.5w†              5.6w†
    * Length given is minimum.
    † w ⫽ length of channel, in.



TABLE 7.23 Shear-Load Factors for Connectors in Lightweight Concrete

Air dry weight, pcf, of concrete      90           95     100        105      110       115        120
Factors for ƒ⬘c ⱕ 4.0 ksi            0.73         0.76    0.78       0.81     0.83      0.86       0.88
Factors for ƒ⬘c ⱖ 5.0 ksi            0.82         0.85    0.87       0.91     0.93      0.96       0.99




   If a concentrated load occurs between the points of maximum and zero moments,
the minimum number of connectors required between the concentrated load and
the point of zero moment is given by

                                   N2 ⫽
                                          q   冉
                                          Vh StMc / M ⫺ Ss
                                                St ⫺ Ss          冊                               (7.70)

where M     ⫽   maximum moment, in-kips
     Mc     ⫽   moment, in-kips, at concentrated load ⬍ M
      Ss    ⫽   section modulus, in3, of steel beam relative to bottom flange
      St    ⫽   section modulus, in3, of transformed section of composite beam relative
                to bottom flange but not to exceed St computed from Eq. (7.66).

   The allowable shear loads for connectors incorporate a safety factor of about
2.5 applied to ultimate load for the commonly used concrete strengths. Not to be
confused with shear values for fasteners given in Art. 7.30, the allowable shear
loads for connectors are applicable only with Eqs. (7.67) to (7.69).
   The allowable horizontal shear loads given in Tables 7.22 and 7.23 may have
to be adjusted for use with formed steel decking. For decking with ribs parallel to
supports (Fig. 7.38a), the allowable loads should be reduced when w / h is less than
1.5 by multiplying the tabulated values by

                                   0.6   冉 冊冉 冊
                                          w
                                          h
                                                  H
                                                  h
                                                    ⫺1 ⱕ1                                        (7.71)

where w ⫽ average width of concrete rib, in
      h ⫽ nominal rib height, in
7.88                                  SECTION SEVEN


         H ⫽ length of stud after welding, in, but not more than (h ⫹ 3) for com-
             putations
For decking with ribs perpendicular to supports, the reduction factor is:

                              冉 冊冉 冊冉 冊
                               0.85
                               兹N
                                         w
                                         h
                                             H
                                             h
                                               ⫺1 ⱕ1                              (7.72)

where N ⫽ number of studs on a beam and in one rib, but three studs are the
maximum that may be considered effective.


7.26.3    LRFD of Encased Beams

Two methods of design are allowed, the difference being whether or not shoring is
used. In both cases, the design strength is ␾bMn, where ␾b ⫽ 0.90. Mn is calculated
for the elastic stress distribution on the composite section if shoring is used or the
plastic stress distribution on the steel section alone if shoring is not used.


7.26.4    LRFD of Composite Beams

As with ASD, the use of shoring to carry deal loads prior to the time the concrete
has hardened determines which design procedures are used. For composite con-
struction where the steel beams are exposed, the design flexural strength for positive
moment (compression in the concrete) is ␾bMn. It is dependent on the depth-
thickness ratio hc / tw of the steel beam, where tw is the web thickness and, for webs
of rolled or formed sections, hc is twice the distance from the neutral axis to the
toe of the fillet at the compression flange, and for webs of built-up sections, hc is
twice the distance from the neutral axis to the nearest line of fasteners at the
compression flange or the inside face of a welded compression flange.
    When hc / tw ⱕ 640 / 兹Fy, ␾b ⫽ 0.85 and Mn is calculated for plastic stress dis-
tribution on the composite section. If hc / tw ⬎ 640 / 兹Fy, ␾b ⫽ 0.90 and Mn is
calculated for elastic stress distribution, with consideration of the effects of shoring.
When the member is subject to negative moment, the practical design approach is
to neglect the composite section and use the requirements for beams in flexure, as
given in Art. 7.20.2.

LRFD of Beams with Shear Connectors. The concepts described in Art. 7.26.2
for ASD apply also to LRFD of beams with shear connectors. Inasmuch as factored
loads are used for LRFD, however, the equations used in the two types of design
differ.
   In regions of positive moment, the total horizontal shear Vh, kips, to be carried
by the shear connectors between the point of maximum moment and the point of
zero moment is the smallest value computed from Eqs. (7.73) to (7.75).
                                      Vh ⫽ 0.85ƒc⬘ Ac                             (7.73)

                                      Vh ⫽ AsFy                                   (7.74)

                                      Vh ⫽ 兺Qn                                    (7.75)
                            STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                            7.89


where ƒ⬘c    ⫽   28-day compressive strength of concrete, ksi
      Ac     ⫽   area of concrete slab within the effective width, in2
      As     ⫽   area of the cross section, in2, of steel beam
      Fy     ⫽   specified minimum yield stress of the steel
    兺Qn      ⫽   sum of the nominal strengths, kips, of the shear connectors between
                 the point of maximum moment and the point of zero moment

The number of shear connectors n must equal or exceed Vh / Qn, where Qn is the
nominal strength of one shear connector.
   The nominal strength, kips, of one stud shear connector embedded in a solid
concrete slab is

                               Qn ⫽ 0.5Asc兹ƒc⬘Ec ⱕ AscFu                        (7.76)

where Asc    ⫽   cross-sectional area of a stud shear connector, in2
       ƒ⬘c   ⫽   28-day compressive strength of concrete, ksi
      Fu     ⫽   minimum specified tensile strength of a stud shear connector, ksi
      Ec     ⫽   modulus of elasticity of the concrete, ksi

The nominal strength, kips, of one channel shear connector embedded in a solid
concrete slab is

                              Qn ⫽ 0.3(tƒ ⫹ 0.5tw)Lc兹ƒc⬘Ec                      (7.77)

where tƒ ⫽ flange thickness of channel shear connector, in
      tw ⫽ web thickness of channel, in
     Lc ⫽ length of channel, in

As in ASD, the shear capacity of stud connectors may have to be reduced if they
are used with formed metal decking. The reduction factors, Eqs. (7.71) and (7.72),
also apply to LRFD.



7.27   MEMBERS SUBJECT TO TORSION

This is a special type of load application, since in normal practice eccentric loads
on beams are counterbalanced to the point where slight eccentricities may be ne-
glected. For example, spandrel beams supporting a heavy masonry wall may not
be concentric with the load, thus inducing torsional stresses, but these will largely
be canceled out by the equally eccentric loads of the floor, partitions, attached
beams, and similar restraints. For this reason, one seldom finds any ill effects from
torsional stresses.
   It is during the construction phase that torsion may be in evidence, usually the
result of faulty construction procedure. In Fig. 7.39 are illustrated some of the bad
practices that have caused trouble in the field: when forms for concrete slabs are
hung on one edge of a beam (usually the light secondary beam) the weight of the
wet concrete may be sufficient to twist the beam. Figure 7.39 shows the correct
method, which reduces torsion. Likewise for spandrels, the floor ties, if any, forms
or the slab itself should be placed prior to the construction of the eccentric wall
(Fig. 7.39b). Connectors for heavy roofing sheets when located on one side of the
7.90                               SECTION SEVEN




          FIGURE 7.39 Steel beams subject to torsion—good and bad practice.



purlin may distort the section; the condition should be corrected by staggering, as
indicated in Fig. 7.39c.
   Equations for computing torsion stresses are given in Art. 5.4.2. Also, see Bib-
liography, Art. 7.55.


7.28   MEMBERS SUBJECT TO CYCLIC LOADING

Relatively few structural members in a building are ever subjected to large, repeated
variations of stress or stress reversals (tension to compression, and vice versa) that
could cause fatigue damage to the steel. Members need not be investigated for this
possibility unless the number of cycles of such stresses exceeds 20,000, which is
nearly equivalent to two applications every day for 25 years.


DESIGN OF CONNECTIONS

Design of connections and splices is a critical aspect of the design process. Because
each fabricator has unique equipment and methods, the detailed configuration of
                          STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                             7.91


connections plays an important part in determining the cost of the fabricated prod-
uct. Consequently, the detailed design of these elements is a part of the work
performed by the fabricator. In the industry, this work is known as detailing.
    Usually, the structural engineer indicates the type of connections and type and
size of fasteners required; for example, ‘‘framed connections with 7⁄8-in A325 bolts
in bearing-type joints,’’ or the type of connection with reference to AWS D1.1
requirements. For beams, the design drawings should specify the reactions. If, how-
ever, the reactions are not noted, the detailer will determine the reactions from the
uniform-load capacity (tabulated in the AISC Manual), giving due consideration to
the effect of large concentrated loads near the connection. For connections resisting
lateral loads, live, wind, or seismic, the design drawing should stipulate the forces
and moments to be carried. Generally, the design should also include a sketch
showing the type of moment connection desired.

Design Criteria for Connections. Either ASD or LRFD may be used to design
the connections of a structure. Selection of the design procedure, however, must be
consistent with the method used to proportion the members. When LRFD proce-
dures are used, the loads and load factors discussed in Arts. 7.15 to 7.28 should
be incorporated. The AISC Manual, Vol. II, Connections, provides many design
aids for both design procedures.



7.29    COMBINATIONS OF FASTENERS

The AISC ASD and LRFD ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel for Buildings’’ dis-
tinguish between existing and new framing in setting conditions for use of fasteners
in connection design.
   In new work, A307 bolts or high-strength bolts in bearing-type connections
should not be considered as sharing the load with welds. If welds are used, they
should be designed to carry the load in the connection. However, when one leg of
a connection angle is connected with one type of fastener and the other leg with a
different type, this rule does not apply. The load is transferred across each joint by
one type of fastener. Such connections are commonly used, since one type of fas-
tener may be selected for shop work and a different type for field work.
   High-strength bolts in slip-critical joints may share the load with welds on the
same connection interface if the bolts are fully tightened before the welds are made.
   For connections in existing frames, existing rivets and high-strength bolts may
be used for carrying stresses from existing dead loads, and welds may be provided
for additional dead loads and design live loads. This provision assumes that what-
ever slip that could occur in the existing joint has already occurred.



7.30    LOAD CAPACITY OF BOLTS

Under service conditions, bolts may be loaded in tension, shear, or a combination
of tension and shear. The load capacities specified in AISC ASD and LRFD spec-
ifications are closely related and are based on the ‘‘Specification for Structural Joints
Using ASTM A325 or A490 Bolts,’’ Research Council on Structural Connections
of the Engineering Foundation. Both bearing-type and slip-critical bolted connec-
tions are proportional for the shear forces on the gross area of bolts.
    7.92                                          SECTION SEVEN


    7.30.1     ASD for Bolts

    Allowable tension and shear stresses for bolts are listed in Table 7.24. The allowable
    bearing load at a bolt hole is 1.5Fudt, where Fu is the specified tensile strength, d
    is the nominal bolt diameter, and t ⫽ thickness of connected part.
        Table 7.25 tabulates maximum sizes for standard, oversize, and slotted bolt
    holes. Oversize holes are permitted only in slip-critical connections. In slip-critical
    connections, slots may be formed without regard to the direction of loading; but in
    bearing-type connections, slot length should be placed normal to the direction of


TABLE 7.24 Allowable Stresses, ksi, for Bolts and Threaded Partsa

                                 Shear in slip-critical connections Fvb                   Bearing-type connections
                                                          Long-slot holes
                                         Oversize                                                Tension Ft, including
                          Standard-     and short-    Transverse     Parallel     Shear        reduction for shear stress
      Fasteners           size holes    slot holes       loadc        loadc        Fv                     ƒvd
A407 bolts                                                                       10.0e,ƒ      26 ⫺ 1.8ƒv ⱕ 20
Threaded Parts and                                                                0.17Fvh     0.43Fv ⫺ 1.8ƒv ⱕ 0.33Fvh,i
  A449 bolts,
  threadedg not
  excluded from shear
  planes
Threaded parts and                                                                0.22Fvh     0.43 Fv ⫺ 1.4ƒv ⱕ 0.33Fvh
  A449 bolts, threads
  excluded from shear
  planesg
A325 bolts, when             17.0          15.0           12.0            10.0   21.0ƒ        兹(44)2 ⫺ 4.39ƒ2v
  threads are not
  excluded from shear
  planes
A325 bolts, when             17.0          15.0           12.0            10.0   30.0ƒ        兹(44)2 ⫺ 2.15ƒ2v
  threads are excluded
  from shear planes
A490 bolts, when             21.0          18.0           15.0            13.0   28.0ƒ        兹(54)2 ⫺ 3.75ƒ2v
  threads are not
  excluded from shear
  planes
A490 bolts, when             21.0          18.0           15.0            13.0   40.0ƒ        兹(54)2 ⫺ 1.82ƒ2v
  threads are excluded
  from shear planes
    a
      For wind or seismic loading, acting alone or in combination with design dead and live loads, allowable stresses
the table may be increased one-third, if the required section then is at least that required for design, dead, live, and
impact loads without this increase. For tension combined with shear, the coefficients of ƒv in the tabulated formulas
could not be changed.
    b
      Assumes clean mill scale and blast-cleaned surfaces with Class A coatings (slip coefficient 0.33). For special
faying-surface conditions, see the Research Council on Structural Connections specification.
    c
      Relative to the long axis of the slotted hole.
    d
      Static loading only. For fatigue conditions, see the AISC ASD ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel for Buildings.’’
    e
      Threads permitted in shear planes.
    ƒ
      Reduce 20% for bolts in bearing-type splices of tension members if the fastener pattern has a length, parallel to
the line of force, exceeding 50 in.
    g
      Applicable to threaded parts meeting the requirements of ASTM A36, A242, A441, A529, A572, A588, A709,
A852 and to A449 bolts in bearing-type connections requiring bolt diameters exceeding 11⁄2 in.
    h
      Fv ⫽ minimum tensile strength, ksi, of bolts.
    i
      For the threaded portion of an upset rod, AbFt should be larger than 0.60AsFy, where Ab is the area at the major
lead diameter, As is the nominal body area before upsetting, and Fv is the specified yield stress, ksi.
                                STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                           7.93


TABLE 7.25 Maximum Bolt-Hole Sizes, in*

                   Diameter         Diameter              Short-slot                     Long-slot
   Bolt           of standard      of oversize               hole                           hole
diameter, in          hole            hole             (width ⫻ length)               (width ⫻ length)
                                                             16 ⫻                          ⁄16 ⫻ 11⁄4
     1                9                  5                 9         11                   9
      ⁄2                ⁄
                        16                ⁄8                ⁄           ⁄
                                                                        16
                                                                16 ⫻ 8                     ⁄16 ⫻ 19⁄16
     5                11                13                  11        7                  11
      ⁄8               ⁄ 16               ⁄16                   ⁄        ⁄
                                                                 16 ⫻                       ⁄16 ⫻ 17⁄8
    3                 13               15                    13                          13
      ⁄4               ⁄ 16               ⁄16                       ⁄    1
                                                               16 ⫻                        ⁄16 ⫻ 23⁄16
    7                 15
      ⁄8               ⁄ 16            11⁄16               15
                                                           ⁄            1
                                                                        1⁄8
                                                                                        15

                                                              16 ⫻                      11⁄16 ⫻ 21⁄2
                       1
     1                1⁄ 16            11⁄4              1⁄ 1          5
                                                                        1⁄16
    11⁄8            d ⫹ ⁄16
                          1
                                     d ⫹ 5⁄16        (d ⫹ ⁄ )
                                                           1
                                                              16 ⫻      (d ⫹ 38
                                                                             ⁄)    (d ⫹ 1⁄16) ⫻ (2.5 ⫻ d )
* Approval of the designer is required for use of oversize or slotted holes. Larger holes than those listed in
the table, if required for tolerance in location of anchor bolts in concrete foundations, may be used in
column base details.



loading. Washers, hardened when used with high-strength bolts, should be placed
over oversize and short-slot holes.
   Long-slot holes may be used in only one ply of the connected parts at an in-
dividual faying surface. When the slot is in an outer ply, plate washers or a con-
tinuous bar with standard holes should be installed to cover the entire slot. Washers
or bars for A325 or A490 bolts should be 5⁄16 in or more thick but need not be
hardened. If hardened washers are required, they should be placed over the outer
surface of a plate washer or bar.


7.30.2     LRFD for Bolts

The design strength of bolts or threaded parts is ␾Rn (tabulated in Table 7.26)
applied to the nominal body area of bolts and threaded parts except upset rods (see
footnote h for Table 7.26). The applied load is the sum of the factored external
loads plus the tension, if any resulting from prying action caused by deformation
of connected parts. If high-strength bolts are required to support the applied loads
by direct tension, they should be proportioned so that the average required strength
(not including initial bolt tightening force) applied to the nominal bolt area will not
exceed the design strength.
   The design strength in tension for a bolt or threaded part subject to combined
tension and shear stresses is also listed in Table 7.26. The value of ƒv, the shear
caused by the factored loads producing tensile stress, should not exceed the values
for shear alone given in Table 7.26.
   Table 7.25 lists maximum dimensions for standard, oversize, and slotted bolt
holes. The limitations on these are the same as those for ASD (Art. 7.26.1).
   The design bearing strength at a bolt hole may be taken as ␾Rn ⫽ ␾3.0dtFu, or
with ␾ ⫽ 0.75, as 2.25dtFu, where d is the nominal bolt diameter, t is the thickness
of the connected part, and Fu is the tensile strength of the connected part.


7.31       LOAD CAPACITY OF WELDS

For welds joining structural steel elements, the load capacity depends on type of
weld, strength of electrode material, and strength of the base metal. Fillet or groove
7.94                                         SECTION SEVEN


TABLE 7.26 Design Strength, ksi, for Bolts and Threaded Parts

                                     Shear in slip-critical connections Fva                Bearing-type connections
                                                                Long-slot
                                                                  holes             Design
                                             Oversized                               shear        Tension Ft, including
                                Standard-    and short-   Transverse    Parallel   strength     reduction for shear stress
          Fasteners             size holes   slot holes     loadsa       loadb        ␾Pn                  ƒv c
A307 bolts                                                                         16.2d,e     39 ⫺ 1.8ƒv ⱕ 30
Threaded parts and A449                                                             0.45Fug    0.73Fu ⫺ 1.8ƒv ⱕ 0.56Fug,h
  bolts, threadsƒ not
  excluded from shear
  planes
Threaded parts and A449                                                             0.60Fug    0.73Fu ⫺ 1.4ƒv ⱕ 0.56Fug
  bolts, threads excluded
  from shear planesƒ
A325 bolts, when threads           17.0         15.0          12.0        10.0     35.1e       85 ⫺ 1.8ƒv ⱕ 68
  are not excluded from
  shear planes
A325 bolts, when threads           17.0         15.0          12.0        10.0     46.8e       85 ⫺ 1.4ƒv ⱕ 68
  are excluded from shear
  planes
A490 bolts, when threads           21.0         18.0          15.0        13.0     43.9e       106 ⫺ 1.8ƒv ⱕ 84
  are not excluded from
  shear planes
A490 bolts, when threads           21.0         18.0          15.0        13.0     58.5e       106 ⫺ 1.4ƒv ⱕ 84
  are excluded from shear
  planes
    a
      Assumes clean mill scale and blast-cleaned surfaces with Class A coatings (slip coefficient 0.33). For special
faying-surface conditions, see the Research Council on Structural Connections LRFD specification for structural joints.
    b
      Relative to the long axis of the slotted holes.
    c
      Static loading only. For fatigue conditions, see the AISC ASD ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel for Buildings.’’
    d
      ␾ ⫽ 0.60. Threads permitted in shear planes.
    e
      ␾ ⫽ 0.65. Reduce design shear strength 20% for bolts in bearing-type splices of tension members if the fastener
pattern has a length, parallel to the line of force, exceeding 50 in.
    ƒ
      Applicable to threaded parts meeting the requirements of ASTM A36, A242, A441, A529, A572, A588, A709, or
A852 and to A449 bolts in bearing-type connections requiring bolt diameters exceeding 11⁄2 in.
    g
      Fu ⫽ minimum tensile strength, ksi, of bolts.
    h
      For the threaded portion of an upset rod, AbRn should be larger than AsFy, where Ab is the area at the major thread
diameter, As is the nominal body area before upsetting, Fy is the specified yield stress, ksi, and ␾Rn is the design tensile
strength, where ␾ ⫽ 0.65.



    welds (Fig. 7.43) are commonly used for steel connections. Groove welds are clas-
    sified as complete or partial penetration. (See Art. 7.3.5.)
        A significant characteristic of fillet-welded joints is that all forces, regardless of
    the direction in which they act, are resolved as shear on the effective throat of the
    weld. For instance, when joining elements such as a girder flange to a web, fillet
    welds are designed to carry the horizontal shear without regard to the tensile or
    compressive stresses in the elements.
        For computation of load capacity, the effective area of groove and fillet welds
    is the effective length times the effective throat thickness. The effective area for a
    plug or slot weld is the nominal cross-sectional area of the hole or slot in the plane
    of the faying surface.
        Except for fillet welds in holes or slots, the effective length of a fillet weld is
    the overall length of weld, including the return. For a groove weld, the effective
    length should be taken as the width of the part joined.
                                             STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                                  7.95


          The effective throat thickness of a fillet weld is the shortest distance from the
      root of the joint to the nominal face of the weld (Fig. 7.3). For fillet welds made
      by the submerged-arc process, however, the effective throat should be taken as the
      leg size for welds 3⁄8 in and smaller but as the theoretical throat plus 0.11 in for
      larger fillet welds.
          For a complete-penetration groove weld, the effective throat is the thickness of
      the thinnest part joined. For partial-penetration groove welds, the effective throat
      thickness depends on the included angle at the root of the groove. For all J or U
      joints and for bevel or V joints with an included angle of 60⬚ or more, the effective
      throat thickness may be taken as the depth of the chamfer. When the included angle
      for bevel or V joints is between 45⬚ and 60⬚, the effective throat thickness should
      be the depth of chamfer minus 1⁄8 in. For flare bevel and flare V-groove welds when
      flush to the surface of a bar or a 90⬚ bend in a formed section, the effective throat
      thickness is 5⁄6 and 1⁄2 the radius of the bar or bend, respectively. When the radius
      is 1 in or more, for gas metal arc welding, the effective thickness is 1⁄4 the radius.
          Welds subject to static loads should be proportioned by ASD for the allowable
      stresses and by LRFD for the design strengths in Table 7.27. If connections will


TABLE 7.27 Design Shear Strength for Welds, ksi*
                                                                                     LRFD
                                                                        Resistance   Nominal strength†                ASD
           Types of weld and stress                   Material           factor ␾       FBM or Fw               Allowable stress
                                                   Complete penetration groove weld
Tension normal to effective area                   Base                    0.90              Fy          Same as base metal
Compression normal to effective area               Base                    0.90              Fy          Same as base metal
Tension or compression parallel to axis of weld
Shear on effective area                            Base                    0.90             0.60Fy       0.30 ⫻ nominal tensile strength
                                                                                                           of weld metal
                                                   Weld electrode          0.80          0.60FEXX
                                                    Partial penetration groove welds
Compression normal to effective area
Tension or compression parallel to axis of weld†   Base                    0.90             Fy           Same as base metal
Shear parallel to axis of weld                     Base                    0.75          0.60FEXX        0.30 ⫻ nominal tensile strength
                                                   Weld electrode                                          of weld metal
Tension normal to effective area                   Base                    0.90              Fy          3.0 ⫻ nominal tensile strength
                                                                                                           of weld metal
                                                   Weld electrode          0.80          0.60FEXX
                                                                 Fillet welds
Shear on effective area                            Base                    0.75          0.60FEXX        0.30 ⫻ nominal tensile strength
                                                   Weld electrode                                          of weld metal
Tension or compression parallel to axis of         Base                    0.90              Fy
  weld†
                                                          Plug or slot welds
Shear parallel to faying surfaces (on effective    Base                    0.75          0.60FEXX        3.0 ⫻ nominal tensile strength
  area)                                            Weld electrode                                          of weld metal

    * Reprinted with permission from F. S. Merritt and R. L. Brockenbrough, ‘‘Structural Steel Designers Handbook,’’
2d ed., McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York.
    † Design strength is the smaller of FBM and Fu:
      FBM ⫽ nominal strength of base metal to be welded, ksi.
      Fw ⫽ nominal strength of weld electrode material, ksi.
      Fy ⫽ specified minimum yield stress of base metal, ksi.
      FEXX ⫽ classification strength of weld metal, as specified in appropriate AWS specification, ksi.
7.96                               SECTION SEVEN


be subject to fatigue from stress fluctuations, load capacity should be reduced as
provided in the AISC ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel for Buildings.’’


7.32   BEARING-TYPE BOLTED CONNECTIONS

When some slip, although very small, may occur between connected parts, the
fasteners are assumed to function in shear. The presence of paint on contact surfaces
is therefore of no consequence. Fasteners may be A307 bolts or high-strength bolts
or any other similar fastener not dependent on development of friction on the con-
tact surfaces.
    Single shear occurs when opposing forces act on a fastener as shown in Fig.
7.39a, tending to slide on their contact surfaces. The body of the fastener resists
this tendency; a state of shear then exists over the cross-sectional area of the fas-
tener.
    Double-shear takes place whenever three or more plates act on a fastener as
illustrated in Fig. 7.40b. There are two or more parallel shearing surfaces (one on
each side of the middle plate in Fig. 7.40b). Accordingly, the shear strength of the
fastener is measured by its ability to resist two or more single shears.

Bearing on Base Metal. This is a factor to consider; but calculation of bearing
stresses in most joints is useful only as an index of efficiency of the net section of
tension members.

Edge Distances. The AISC ‘‘Specification for Structural Steel for Buildings,’’
ASD and LRFD, recommends minimum edge distances, center of hole to edge of
connected part, as given in Table 7.28. In addition, the edge distance, in, when in
the direction of force should not be less than 2P / Fut for ASD or P / ␾Fut for LRFD,
where p is the force, kips, transmitted by one fastener to the part for which the
edge distance is applicable; ␾ ⫽ 0.75; Fu is the specified minimum tensile strength
of the part (not the fastener), ksi; and t is the thickness of the part, in.
   A special rule applies to beams with framed connections that are usually de-
signed for the shear due to beam reactions. The edge distance for the beam web,
with standard-size holes, should be not less than 2PR / Fut for ASD or PR / ␾Fut for




         FIGURE 7.40 Bolted connection in shear and bearing: (a) with bolt in
         single shear; (b) with bolt in double shear (two shearing planes).
                             STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                     7.97


          TABLE 7.28 Minimum Edge Distance for Punched, Reamed, or
          Drilled Holes, in

            Fastener                                  At rolled edges of plates, shapes
          diameter, in      At sheared edges              or bars or gas-cut edges†
                1                    7                                 3
                  ⁄2                  ⁄8                                ⁄4
                5                    1                                 7
                  ⁄8                1 ⁄8                                ⁄8
                3
                  ⁄4                11⁄4                             1
                7
                  ⁄8                11⁄2*                            11⁄8
             1                      13⁄4*                            11⁄4
             11⁄8                   2                                11⁄2
             11⁄4                   21⁄4                             14⁄8
           Over 11⁄4          13⁄4 ⫻ diameter                  11⁄4 ⫻ diameter
              * These may be 11⁄4 in at the ends of beam connection angles.
              † All edge distances in this column may be reduced 1⁄8 in when the hole is at
          a point where stress does not exceed 25% of the maximum allowed stress in the
          element.



LRFD, where PR is the beam reaction per bolt, kips. This rule, however, need not
be applied when the bearing stress transmitted by the fastener does not exceed
0.90Fu.
   The maximum distance from the center of a fastener to the nearest edge of parts
in contact should not exceed 6 in or 12 times the part thickness.

Minimum Spacing. The AISC specification also requires that the minimum dis-
tance between centers of bolt holes be at least 22⁄3 times the bolt diameter. But at
least three diameters is desirable. Additionally, the hole spacing, in, when along
the line of force, should be at least 2P / Fut ⫹ d / 2 for ASD or P / ␾Fut ⫹ d / 2 for
LRFD, where P, Fu, and t are as previously defined for edge distance and d ⫽
nominal diameter of fastener, in. Since this rule is for standard-size holes, appro-
priate adjustments should be made for oversized and slotted holes. In no case should
the clear distance between holes be less than the fastener diameter.

Eccentric Loading. Stress distribution is not always as simple as for the joint in
Fig. 7.40a where the fastener is directly in the line of significant. Sometimes, the
load is applied eccentrically, as shown in Fig. 7.41. For such connections, tests
show that use of actual eccentricity to compute the maximum force on the extreme
fastener is unduly conservative because of plastic behavior and clamping force
generated by the fastener. Hence, it is permissible to reduce the actual eccentricity
to a more realistic ‘‘effective’’ eccentricity.
   For fasteners equally spaced on a single gage line, the effective eccentricity in
inches is given by

                                                      1 ⫹ 2n
                                         leff ⫽ l ⫺                                           (7.78)
                                                        4

where l ⫽ the actual eccentricity and n ⫽ the number of fasteners. For the bracket
in Fig. 7.41b the reduction applied to l1 is (1 ⫹ 2 ⫻ 6) / 4 ⫽ 3.25 in.
   For fasteners on two or more gage lines
7.98                                    SECTION SEVEN




       FIGURE 7.41 Eccentrically loaded fastener groups: (a) with bolts in shear only; (b)
       with bolts in combined tension and shear.



                                                    1⫹n
                                       leff ⫽ l ⫺                                        (7.79)
                                                     2
when n is the number of fasteners per gage line. For the bracket in Fig. 7.41a, the
reduction is (1 ⫹ 4) / 2 ⫽ 2.5 in.
    In Fig. 7.41a, the load P can be resolved into an axial force and a moment:
Assume two equal and opposite forces acting through the center of gravity of the
fasteners, both forces being equal to and parallel to P. Then, for equal distribution
on the fasteners, the shear on each fastener caused by the force acting in the di-
rection of P is ƒv ⫽ P / n, where n is the number of fasteners.
    The other force forms a couple with P. The shear stress ƒe due to the couple is
proportional to the distance from the center of gravity and acts perpendicular to the
line from the fastener to the center. In determining ƒe, it is convenient to first express
it in terms of x, the force due to the moment Pleff on an imaginary fastener at unit
distance from the center. For a fastener at a distance a from the center, ƒe ⫽ ax,
and the resisting moment is ƒe a ⫽ a2x. The sum of the moments equals Pleff. This
                           STRUCTURAL STEEL CONSTRUCTION                                   7.99


equation enables x to be evaluated and hence, the various values of ƒe. The resultant
R of ƒe and ƒv can then be found; a graphical solution usually is sufficiently ac-
curate. The stress so obtained must not exceed the allowable value of the fastener
in shear (Art. 7.30).
   For example, in Fig. 7.41a, ƒv ⫽ P / 8. The sum of the moments is
                                   4a21x ⫹ 4a22x ⫽ Pleff

                                                  Pleff
                                       x⫽
                                             4a21x ⫹ 4a22x
Then, ƒe ⫽ a2x for the most distant fastener, and R can be found graphically as
indicated in Fig. 7.41a.

Tension and Shear. For fastener group B in Fig. 7.41b, use actual eccentricity l2
since these fasteners are subjected to combined tension and shear. Here too, the
load P can be resolved into an axial shear force through the fasteners and a couple.
Then, the stress on each fastener caused by the axial shear is P / n, where n is the
number of fasteners. The tensile forces on the fasteners vary with distance from
the center of rotation of the fastener group.
   A simple method, erring on the safe side, for computing the resistance moment
of group B fasteners assumes that the center of rotation coincides with the neutral
axis of the group. It also assumes that the total bearing pressure below the neutral